     Best Value Procurement Guide

     Part 1 – Developing Request for RFPs




Issued by:

General Services Department
State Purchasing Division
State of New Mexico



January 2016
                              Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1




TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.     Introduction .........................................................................................................................

II.    Quick Reference Glossary ............................................................................................... Page 1

III.   Overview of Best Value Procurement ............................................................................Page 4

IV.    Developing Request for Proposals (RFPs) ............................................................... Page 9


EXHIBITS
Exhibit A: Sample RFP Template …………………………………………………………………….Page 17

Exhibit B: RFP Amendment Form Template ..……………………………………………………Page 35a

Exhibit C: Sample Application for Resident Certification …………………………………..Page 36a
                      Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1




I. INTRODUCTION

 This Guide to competitive requests for proposals has been prepared by the State Purchasing Division

 (SPD) of the General Services Department (GSD) of the State of New Mexico (State) and is intended solely

 as reference material for state agencies and local public bodies within New Mexico. This Guide does not

 supersede local, state, or federal laws.



 Best value procurement is the preferred method for considering evaluation factors in addition to

 cost/price for use by any State agency for selecting a firm or contractor to provide services, goods, or

 tangible personal property. The Guide has been organized into two primary sections that relate to

 providing instructions and requirements to potential offerors as well as identifying the required content of

 RFPs. The Guide includes examples of required documents to be used to ensure attention is given to all

 the required steps and processes. These document samples can be tailored to specific procurements

 without requiring new document creation.



 In addition to a Quick Reference Glossary of terms, Section II, definitions are also provided in the Sample

 RFP template, Exhibit A. Throughout the Guide, formal procurement terms are in italics. These definitions

 reflect statute or other legal resources use and pertain only to this Guide. The statutory language should

 be used to interpret any ambiguity.



 Please direct any questions, comments about this Guide, or requests for assistance with any aspect of the

 Best Value Procurement process to SPD, (505) 827-0472.
II. QUICK REFERENCE GLOSSARY
   Best Value Procurement: Procurement method implemented by issuing Request for Proposals (RFP)
    where evaluation factors in addition to cost/price are considered in the selection of a firm or contractor
    and encompasses the total benefits a State entity expects from the acquisition.

   Code of Conduct: Governmental Conduct Act. NMSA 1978, §10-16-1, et seq.

   Competitive Qualifications-Based Selection (QBS): Procurement method using an RFP but, because price is
    not an evaluation factor for selection of a firm or contractor, does not qualify as Best Value Procurement.

   Confidentiality Agreement: Written covenant governing how procurement activities should be carried out
    by the evaluation committee. See also, Non-Disclosure Agreement.

   Confidential information: “Any information which is available to an employee because of the employee’s
    status as an employee within a state agency or a local public body which is not a matter of public
    knowledge or available to the public on request.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-39

   Conflict of Interest: A situation in which a person has a duty to more than one person or organization,
    but cannot do justice to the actually or potentially adverse interests of both parties. Black’s Law
    Dictionary 363 (10th Ed.) 2014

   Construction: “Building, altering, repairing, installing or demolishing in the ordinary course of business
    any:
             (1) road, highway, bridge, parking area or related project;
             (2) building, stadium or other structure;
             (3) airport, subway or similar facility;
             (4) park, trail, athletic field, golf course or similar facility;
             (5) dam, reservoir, canal, ditch or similar facility;
             (6) sewage or water treatment facility power generating plant,
                   pump station, natural gas compressing station or similar facility;
             (7) sewage, water, gas or other pipeline;
             (8) transmission line;
             (9) radio, television or other tower;
             (10) water, oil or other storage tank;
             (11) shaft, tunnel or other mining appurtenance;
             (12) electrical wiring, plumbing or plumbing fixture, gas piping, gas
                   appliances or water conditioners;
             (13) air conditioning conduit, heating or other similar mechanical
                   work; or
             (14) similar work, structures or installations.
    Shall also include:
             (1) leveling or clearing land;
             (2) excavating earth;
             (3) drilling wells of any type, including seismographic shot holes or core drilling; and
             (4) similar work, structures or installations.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-40

   Contract: “Any agreement for the procurement of tangible personal property, services or construction.”
    NMSA 1978, §13-1-41

   Contractor: “Any business having a contract with a state agency or local public body.”
    NMSA 1978, §13-1-43
                                             1
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1



   Design/Build: Type of project in which the contract includes design and construction services.
    NMSA 1978, §13-1-119.1

   Goods: Tangible and consumable personal property having a physical existence, i.e., durable, commercial
    off-the-shelf products such as vehicles, computers, and equipment; products of economic output.

   Invitation for Bids: All documents, including those attached or incorporated by reference, used for
    soliciting sealed bids.

   Local Public Body: “Every political subdivision of the state that expends public money from whatever
    source derived, including but not limited to counties, county institutions, bureaus or commissions;
    incorporated cities, towns or villages, drainage, conservancy, irrigation or other districts; charitable
    institutions for which an appropriation is made by the legislature; and every office or officer of any of
    the above.” NMSA 1978, §6-6-1

   Low-Bid Procurement: Procurement process for selecting a firm or contractor based exclusively on price
    obtained by verbal or written quotes or issuing an official Invitation for Bids. Also referred to as Low or
    Lowest-Priced Procurement.

   Non-Disclosure Agreement: see Confidentiality Agreement.

   Nonresponsive: Proposal or bid that does not conform to requirements set forth in the Request for
    Proposals or Invitation for Bids and is not evaluated by the evaluation committee.

   Procurement:
           “A. purchasing, renting, leasing, lease purchasing or otherwise acquiring items of tangible
                 personal property, services or construction; and
            B. all procurement functions, including but not limited to preparation of specifications,
                 solicitation of sources, qualification or disqualification of sources, preparation and award
                 of contract and contract administration.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-74

   Procurement Manager: Individual responsible for purchasing or otherwise acquiring items of tangible
    personal property, services, or construction or for managing and coordinating procurement agents,
    buyers, or purchasing agents; the primary point of contact for a firm or contractor.

   Professional Services: “Services of architects, archeologists, engineers, surveyors, landscape architects,
    medical arts practitioners, scientists, management and systems analysts, certified public accountants,
    registered public accountants, lawyers, psychologists, planners, researchers, construction managers and
    other persons or businesses providing similar professional services, which may be designated as such by
    a determination issued by the state purchasing agent or a central purchasing office.”
    NMSA 1978, §13-1-76

   Qualifications-Based Selection (QBS): Procurement process for selecting architects, engineers, landscape
    architects, surveyors, and construction management professionals on the basis of qualifications and
    subsequent negotiations as to price rather than price being an evaluation factor.

   Request for Proposals (RFP): “All documents, including those attached to or incorporated by reference,
    used for soliciting proposals.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-81. “Material respects of a request for a proposal
    include, but are not limited to, price, quality, quantity or delivery requirements.”
    NMSA 1978, §13-1-85


                                                    2
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

   Resident Preference: “Business with a valid resident business or contractor certificate issued by the NM
    Taxation & Revenue Department.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-22(A)

   Responsible Bidder: “Bidder who submits a responsive bid and has furnished, when required, information
    and data to prove that his financial resources, production or service facilities, personnel, service
    reputation and experience are adequate to make satisfactory delivery of the services, construction or
    items of tangible personal property described in the Invitation for Bids.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-82

   Responsible Offeror: “Offeror who submits a responsive proposal and has furnished, when required,
    information and data to prove that his financial resources, production or service facilities, personnel,
    service reputation and experience are adequate to make satisfactory delivery of the services or items of
    tangible personal property described in the proposal.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-83

   Responsive Bid: “Bid which conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the
    Invitation for Bids. Material aspects of a bid include, but are not limited to, price, quality, quantity or
    delivery requirements.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-84

   Responsive Offer: “Offer which conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the
    Request for Proposals. Material respects of a proposal include, but are not limited to, price quality,
    quantity or delivery requirements.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-85

   Scope of Work: Specific details of work to be performed in completion of a project under a contract.

   Services: “Furnishing labor, time or effort by a contractor not involving the delivery of a specific end
    product other than reports and other materials which are merely incidental to the required
    performance; includes the furnishing insurance but does not include construction or the services of
    employees of a state agency or a local public body.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-87

   State Agency: “Any department, commission, council, board, committee, institution, legislative body,
    agency, government corporation, educational institution or official of the executive, legislative or judicial
    branch of the government of this state; includes the purchasing division of the general services
    department and the state purchasing agent but does not include local public bodies.”
    NMSA 1978, §13-1-90

   Subcontractor: “Individual who takes a portion of a contract from the principal contractor or another
    subcontractor.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1651 (10th Ed.) 2014

   Tangible Personal Property: “Tangible property other than real property having a physical existence,
    including but not limited to supplies, equipment, materials and printed materials.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-93

   Vendor: Entity providing a service or tangible personal property to a state agency.

   Veterans Preference: Business with a valid resident veteran business certificate issued by the NM
    Taxation & Revenue Department. See NMSA 1978, §13-1-22(A). See also, State Purchasing Division
    (SPD) Policy Memo FY13-001: Application of Veterans Preference, attached as Exhibit H to Policy Memo.




                                                     3
                               Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

III. OVERVIEW OF BEST VALUE PROCUREMENT

Purposes of the Procurement Code:

       A. to provide fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in public procurement;
       B. to maximize the purchasing value of public funds; and
       C. to provide safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity.
          NMSA 1978, §13-1-9(C)

Most purchases by government for services and tangible personal property are done on the
basis of lowest price. The best contractors for a large construction project, work in the
specialized field of information technology (IT), or a complex professional services purchase
should be more than minimally qualified in their respective fields. Entering into a contract for
these services based on price alone would not be the best use of fiscally-constrained tax
dollars. For many projects, price is only one factor to consider, and Best Value Procurement
should be used in those instances.

Consider using Best Value Procurement for larger, higher priced procurements, including major
construction, manufacturing, and complex professional services valued at more than $60,000,1
where risk of late or substandard work is expected to outweigh the cost of avoidance. Always
enter into a contract with a firm that has demonstrated it will complete a project on time,
meet specifications, and provide a superior end-product with reduced risk.

Purchases of small dollar, commercial off-the-shelf, non-fabricated tangible personal property
alone, without a services component, generally lend themselves better to Low-Bid Procurement
methods.2 Follow the requirements for “Competitive Sealed Proposals” in New Mexico State
Statutes and the New Mexico Administrative Code.3 In contrast, “Competitive Sealed Bids,” or
Low-Bid Procurement, focus on identifying the lowest responsive and responsible bidders for a
project.

Always make procurement decisions based on the greatest public interest, regardless of the
type of services, tangible personal property, goods being procured, or the type of procurement
method used. Figure 1 below illustrates the types of procurement best served by Best Value
Procurement versus Low-Bid Procurement. The importance of non-price factors impact
procurement decisions.




1
    Small purchases threshold, NMSA 1978, §13-1-125
2
    Competitive sealed proposals, conditions of use. NMSA 1978, §13-1-111
3
 State of New Mexico Procurement Code, NMSA 1978, §13-1-28 through 199; Use of Competitive Sealed Proposals for
Construction and Facility Maintenance, Services and Repairs, Rule 1.4.8, NMAC. Certain types of procurements and entities are
exempt from the Procurement Code, NMSA 1978, §13-1-98. Exempt entities must adopt and follow their own established
procurement processes and codes

                                                                 4
                                         Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1


Figure 1: Recommended Use—Best Value Procurement vs. Low-Bid Procurement


       Competitive
         Sealed
       PROPOSALS
                                               COMPLEX SERVICES
            BEST
                                               Complex services carry a higher risk for substandard, late
           VALUE                               performance, or less than satisfactory personnel.
              Price is ONE factor




                                               CONSTRUCTION
                                               Building, alteration, repair, installation, or demolition of
                                               buildings, structures, roads, and facilities where schedule,
                                               quality, and performance risk must be abated
              Price is THE ONLY factor




                                               ROUTINE & NON-PROFESS IONAL SERVICES
                                               Routine repair, maintenance, and janitorial services that do
                                               not involve delivery of a specific tangible product or carry
                                               a high risk associated with late or substandard
                                               performance



                                               GOODS
           LOWEST                              Tangible and consumable personal property having a
                                               physical existence, i.e., durable, commercial off-the-shelf
             BID                               products such as vehicles, computers, and equipment


       Competitive
         Sealed
          BIDS




                                                               5
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

Best Value Procurement facilitates selecting contractors based on qualifications and criteria
where price is one of several factors. State agencies and local governments realize advantages
when using this type of procurement:

      Allows discussions, clarifications, and negotiations with potential contractors
       (responsible offerors);

      Provides for tailoring specific projects, i.e., those that may require a combination of
       tangible personal property, professional services, and construction, including
       design/build, or those that involve phasing;

      Establishes an open, standardized, and competitive environment for responsible
       offerors;

      Reduces schedule and quality risks for major projects;

      Delineates clearly procurement priorities by identifying in the contract formation phase
       of the acquisition the relative weighting of evaluation criteria for an award;

      Allows a state agency to place a premium on selecting contractors with lower likelihood
       of claims/disputes and higher likelihood of contractor responsiveness;

      Increases accountability for delivery of services, tangible personal property,
       construction, and products;

      Increases likelihood of a collaborative relationship between the contractor and the
       state agency during performance after the award;

      Provides that a contractor’s performance risk (cost, schedule, quality) is
       evaluated/appraised on realistic expectations consistent with state agency goals;

      Minimizes risk of poor-quality workmanship and “corner–cutting” sometimes
       associated with a “low bid” mentality; and

      Reassures potential offerors that a sensible investment in time, resources, and
       opportunity costs to distinguish their firms from others provides a reasonable
       likelihood of yielding a profitable contract award versus simply undercutting a
       competitor’s price.

Once the procurement officer makes a written determination that Best Value Procurement is
preferred for a specific purchase, the state agency must determine it has adequate resources
to carry out the process properly. The state agency must also consider the viability and




                                              6
                             Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

legality of the project. Finally, life-cycle of the product should be a prominent factor in making
procurement decisions.

Some state agencies might conclude they have inadequate personnel, expertise, or time to fully
execute a complex Best Value Procurement RFP. By law, the state agency must comply at all
times with all state regulations regarding procurement, including the State Use Act.4 Be
familiar with applicable Procurement Code requirements and speak with a buyer at SPD prior
to initiating an unfamiliar or complex procurement process. In addition, SPD provides
procurement documents, training, and additional resources through its website:
http://www.generalservices.state.nm.us/statepurchasing/.

Although the preferred procurement method, Best Value Procurement is not always used.
Some procurement decisions are appropriately based solely on price. In addition, some
projects are exempt from either Best-Value Procurement or the Procurement Code
regulations.5 Examples of exemptions:

          Municipalities with home rule charters and purchasing ordinances;

          Contracts with professional entertainers;

          Contracts for museum artworks;

          Contracts for a QBS procurement that use a specific process for obtaining the
           professional services of architects, engineers, landscape architects, surveyors, and
           construction management professionals; and

          Contracts for the purchase of research consultant services by institutions of higher
           learning.


Only after the State Purchasing Agent or the Procurement officer provides a written
determination that Best Value Procurement is in the best interest of the procuring entity may
that method be used. Include such written determination in the procurement file. SPD
ultimately ensures compliance with the New Mexico Procurement Code, but all parties
involved in the public procurement process have a fiduciary responsibility to uphold
standards to ensure that taxpayer dollars yield best-value outcomes for the general public
(see Figure 2, below).




4
    State Use Act, NMSA 1978, §13-1C-1 through §13-1C-7
5
    Exemptions from the Procurement Code, NMSA 1978, §13-1-98

                                                            7
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

Figure 2: Oversight roles and responsibilities of participants involved in the
procurement process


PARTICIPANT       EMPLOYER     ROLE IN THE PROCUREMENT PROCESS

Procurement       State        This individual provides the necessary resources to carry out the
Officer           Purchasing   functions outlined in the New Mexico Procurement Code for all
(or State         Division     applicable public transactions. In some situations, the procurement
Purchasing                     officer will execute many of the procurement functions on behalf of
Agent)                         a state agency. The procurement officer is a non-voting participant
                               in the procurement process and guides the proper application of the
                               procurement law, rule, and guidelines.

Procurement       Any state    This individual oversees the procurement processes within the
Manager           agency       respective state agency. The procurement manager is the liaison
                               between the state agency and the procurement officer at SPD. To
                               ensure impartiality, procurement managers are non-voting
                               participants in the procurement process.

Project/Program Any state      This individual has expertise in the specific services or goods being
Manager         agency         procured and usually will manage the contract's full implementation
                               once the contract terms have been finalized. Because of the
                               project/program manager’s expertise, he should provide input
                               during the drafting of the scope of work and, in some cases,
                               participate as a member of the evaluation committee.

Evaluation        Various      A group usually made up of three to five individuals from various
Committee                      backgrounds recruited for a specific procurement by the
                               procurement manager and the project/program manager. This group
                               evaluates the responsive proposals and ultimately recommends a
                               successful responsible offeror to the source selection authority to
                               carry out the scope of work outlined in a contract (see “Selecting the
                               Evaluation Committee” – Best Value Procurement Guide Part 2,
                               Section V).

General Counsel   Any state    This individual, prior to state agencies finalizing an award, reviews all
                  agency       documents, contracts, and amendments to ensure legal sufficiency
                               of the procurement.

Subject Matter    Various      The evaluation committee may request as part of its evaluation the
Expert (SME)                   advice, recommendations, or expertise of non-voting SMEs. For
                               construction projects, architects and engineers with expertise in the
                               type of project being undertaken can provide invaluable consultative
                               services as part of the evaluation process.



                                                 8
                       Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

IV. DEVELOPING REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS

   Best Practices: Developing Request for Proposals (RFP)

   1. Be thorough when drafting the RFP. The more detail provided to prospective responsible offerors
      in the RFP, the less risk for “contingency” pricing.
   2. Use language that does not restrict competition, such as a requirement to use patent-protected
      tangible or intellectual property in carrying out the project. These resources might not be
      accessible to all potential responsible offerors and requiring them would be exclusionary in
      nature. Similarly, do not use past experience requirements that might exclude qualified
      responsible offerors from submitting a proposal.
   3. Involve several people, including potential managers of the proposed project, to review the RFP
      for accuracy and clarity prior to finalizing the document.



Once the procurement officer approves a Best Value Procurement, the procurement manager
shall develop an RFP for the project. Although state agencies may reserve the right to request
information outside of the RFP process, the RFP is the primary document in which evaluation
criteria is outlined and information requested. If information regarding important evaluation
criteria is not included in the RFP, it cannot be used later to evaluate the proposals.

Greater specificity within the technical requirements of the RFP will limit proposals to narrow
technical parameters and reduce the evaluation committee’s need to differentiate on
qualifications rather than price. Conversely, the evaluation committee is likely to find that
RFPs with very broad technical requirements will yield a selection of proposals with a higher
degree of variation in qualifications and price. In a best-value scenario, price would likely be a
less consequential factor in the overall evaluation scheme. Relative weighting of price to other
evaluation criteria should be directly tied to the state agency’s confidence in the technical
specifications of the project.

RFPs vary substantially. Those for routine services and for some professional services can be
short and straightforward. RFPs for complex professional services are more extensive and will
incorporate technical specifications. This is also true for the QBS procurement process for the
selection of architects, engineers, landscape architects, and surveys, which does not utilize
price or cost as a factor to be considered in evaluation criteria. Large construction projects are
highly technical and might include additional requirements, such as statements of
qualifications, bonding, and safety records. In all cases, however, the RFP must contain the
following basic elements:

       A. Background and Need for the Project: Answers the question “WHY?”

           Include one or two paragraphs that describe why the project is important to or
           required by the state agency, the need(s) it will address and, once completed, how
           and by whom it will be used.

                                                   9
              Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1


B. Project Description: Answers the questions “WHO, WHAT, WHERE, WHEN?”

   If the project is a professional service, include one or two paragraphs that describe
   the deliverables required, such as reports, data, or drawings; the required
   format(s) of the deliverables; the deadline(s) for various phases and final
   completion of the project. The project description must also include any technical
   specifications or professional standards required for the project. If any planning or
   background documents exist, reference them here as exhibits or attachments to the
   RFP, or make them available on a website or at an office address.

   If the project is construction or facility maintenance, include one or two paragraphs
   that describe the location, size, and type of facilities involved and deadlines for
   various phases and final completion of the project. The project description must
   also describe any required technical specifications or professional standards. If any
   planning, design, engineering, or background documents exist, reference them here
   as exhibits or attachments to the RFP, or make them available on a website or at an
   office address.

C. Budget Information: Determine project budgets by reviewing past background
   studies and planning documents. Disclose specific budget parameters for all project
   types.

D. Procurement Process Information

   1. Questions about the RFP: State agencies typically allow potential offerors to ask
      questions about the RFP, particularly if the RFP does not include a pre-proposal
      conference. Provide instructions to potential offerors that responses will be
      provided only to questions submitted in writing and only to clarify information
      already included in the RFP. Written questions must be received not later than
      the RFP specified receipt date, typically at least 3 days prior to the proposal due
      date, and should be sent via email to the procurement manager or staff person
      or posted in a field-fillable document on the state agency’s website. All
      questions and responses must be made public to all offerors.

   2. Amendments to the RFP: Instruct potential offerors on requesting copies of
      RFP amendments, if issued. The simplest method for amending the RFP is to
      post the amendment on the state agency’s website. If this method is used,
      provide the state agency’s website address in this section. Alternatively, offerors
      can register with the state agency by providing their contact information to the
      procurement manager or staff person who will distribute the RFP amendments
      when issued to all potential offerors. As a general rule, if amendment content to
      RFPs is expected to affect price or technical content, issue the amendment no
      later than one (1) week before the due date for proposal submissions.


                                       10
              Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1


   3. Proposal Submissions: Provide the required date, time, and physical address
      for submitting proposals as well as instructions for separating technical and
      cost proposals. Each proposal (technical proposal and cost proposal) must be
      submitted in separate, sealed packages, with the number and name of the RFP
      referenced on each envelope. Confirm that proposals received after the deadline
      will be considered nonresponsive and will not be opened or evaluated.

   4. Pre-Proposal Conference: If a pre-proposal conference is planned, provide the
      time, date, and physical location of the conference as well as whether
      attendance is mandatory.

   5. Interviews: Inform offerors that the state agency may or may not conduct
      interviews with one or more of the responsible offerors prior to entering into
      contract negotiations.

   6. Nonresponsive Proposals: State specifically that proposals not meeting the
      requirements set forth in the RFP may be deemed nonresponsive and, therefore,
      not eligible for further consideration. A proposal submitted after the deadline
      stated in the RFP would be deemed nonresponsive.

E. Definitions: Providing definitions is optional but helpful when working with
   complex terms that could have various meanings in different contexts.

F. Proposal Format

   1. Page Limit and Formatting: Describe any page limits and formatting
   requirements. Typically, simple professional services projects may be limited to ten
   pages, not including key project staff resumes and other attachments. IT and
   construction projects may be longer, twenty to thirty pages, not including key
   project staff resumes and other attachments.

   RFPs may also require potential offerors to use 10 or 12-point type and one inch
   margins to ensure readability.

   RFPs usually require that the offeror submit several copies of each proposal so that
   each member of the evaluation committee can receive a copy to evaluate
   simultaneously. Provide instructions if an electronic copy of a proposal is required.

   State statute grants the procurement officer the right to waive technical
   irregularities that do not alter the price, quality, or quantity of the services, items of
   tangible personal property, or construction bid or offered as long as the
   irregularities are insignificant mistakes that can be corrected without prejudice to




                                         11
              Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

   other responsible bidders (see NMSA 1978, §13-1-132, and Rule 1.4.1.42 NMAC:
   Mistakes in Proposals). Formatting irregularities can be a disqualifying
   transgression that result in a determination that the proposal is nonresponsive.



   2. Proposal Content: Instruct offerors to include a submittal or cover letter to
   reference the RFP number and title, name, contact information, and signature of the
   principal, president, general contractor, or team leader. Offerors should identify a
   timeframe for duration the price proposal will remain in effect and include a
   statement verifying that all information provided in the proposal is true and
   correct, acknowledge all RFP amendments, and indicate a willingness to be bound
   by general contact terms and conditions contained in the sample contract.

   Technical proposals consist of responses to technical evaluation criteria:

      a) past performance or qualifications;
      b) experience relevant to the project;
      c) project staffing or project team;
      d) management plan or approach to the project;
      e) health and safety record (for construction and facility maintenance projects);
      f) resident preference.

   Price proposals consist of a response to price evaluation criteria.

G. Evaluation Criteria: In an actual RFP, provide the total number of points assigned
   to each criterion. For more details on assigning value to interviews, see the
   Managing the Procurement Process section.

   The New Mexico Administrative Code has specific requirements for construction
   and facility maintenance, service, and repair projects. Criteria for these projects
   must include past performance, management plan, project staffing/craft labor
   capabilities, and health and safety. Price can be assigned up to 70% of the total
   points; each of these four criteria must be assigned at least 20% of the total
   remaining points (see Figure 3). A state agency can identify additional evaluation
   factors and assign points for those factors as appropriate for the type of
   procurement being done.




                                       12
                       Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1


 Figure 3: Scoring breakdown of non-price criteria


                                            Non-Price Criteria:
                               Once price (shown in gray below)
                       has been assigned a weight of up to 70% of
                    the total score, allocate the remaining points
                 to non-price criteria (shown in shades of red).
            Weights and quantity of non-price criteria
            will vary by project; assigned in accordance
              to the needs of the state agency,
                   except in projects involving
                          construction, as noted
                                      below.




Price
Criteria

                         Non-Price
                         Criteria




For construction projects, of the points available for                    20%
non-price criteria, at least 20% must be allotted to
each of the following four categories:                                    1             20%
                                                                                    2
1) Past Performance;
2) Management Plan;
3) Project Staffing/Craft Labor Capabilities; and                                       3
4) Health and Safety.                                                                       20%
The remaining 20% of the non-price criteria points are         5      4
available to assign to:                                         20%           20%
5) other criteria that the state agency deems
                                                                5               4
appropriate, such as financial capabilities,
warranty, or scheduling.
[Rule 1.4.8.1-15, NMAC]



                                                 13
          Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

1.   Past Performance or Qualifications (X Points): In the Past Performance or
     Qualifications section, instruct the offeror to summarize the qualifications of
     the firm, company or project team. This section should address the field(s) in
     which the team works; general credentials of the team members; the number
     of years it has operated or the team has worked together; size in terms of
     staffing and/or revenue; and overarching performance metrics, such as
     customer satisfaction rates (assessed through surveys, focus groups, etc.), on-
     time and on-budget completion rate, or any special awards and distinctions.

     Provide instructions for the offeror to respond to any required minimum
     requirements for the firm or team qualifications.

2.   Experience Relevant to the Project (X Points): Experience relevant to the
     project can be a factor under Past Performance or Qualifications but is also
     useful as a stand-alone evaluation criterion. The RFP can require the offeror to
     provide a reasonable number of examples of similar projects completed in the
     recent past but should not be worded to be unnecessarily restrictive and limit
     competition. The RFP must provide for full and open competition.

     Instruct the offeror to include one to two paragraphs on each project, together
     with the client names and addresses, budgets, and timeframe of the projects.
     The RFP may request up to three references for the projects included. In
     addition, the RFP can ask for information detailing whether the staff members
     assigned to successful previous projects mentioned in the proposal will be the
     same people assigned to the current proposed project under the Project
     Staffing or Project Team section.

     Provide instructions on any minimum requirements for the type of experience
     the state agency will consider; that information must be included in this
     section of the RFP. All requirements should be reasonable within the current
     context of the field in which the project will be carried out and not unfairly
     restrict qualified offerors from competing. Below are examples of justifiable
     requirements that impact competition in the construction field:

         Restrictions on technical specifications of past projects:
              Must have experience constructing at least one Bio-Safety Level II or III labs in the
              last five years (restrictive by specialty project where technical specifications are
              required)

         Restrictions on geographical past experience:
              Must have experience working on projects in rural New Mexico (restrictive by
              geographic challenges but not specific geography)

         Restrictive by interval of time:
              Must have constructed at least three projects over $10m in the last five years
              (restrictive by project size/scope during a reasonable interval of time).



                                        14
           Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

 3.   Project Staffing or Project Team (X Points): Instruct offeror to provide one
      paragraph to include the team member’s name, title, and qualifications for
      each member of the project team. This section should also include an
      organizational chart depicting how the team functions or works together for a
      particular project. The RFP should require resumés for key members of the
      project team to be provided as attachments to the proposal. Some RFPs may
      also request a matrix with the project team members on one axis and relevant
      project experience or areas of expertise on the other axis.

      Provide instructions in this section on any minimum requirements that must
      be included for the type of firm or team the state agency will consider (e.g., the
      team must include at least one engineer licensed in the State of New Mexico).

4.    Management Plan or Approach to the Project (X Points): Instruct offeror to
      describe in this section how it proposes to organize, manage, and administer
      the project to meet the project requirements, including but not limited to
      budget, phasing, completion date, quality, and safety. A project schedule must
      be included in this section. If the project is atypical, this section provides an
      opportunity for the offeror to suggest innovative solutions or approaches.

5.    Health and Safety Record (for Construction and Facility Maintenance projects)
      (X Points): Several metrics in the construction industry can be helpful in
      predicting future safety performance and assessing an offeror’s commitment
      to the safety of a future project. Typical of safety components found in a
      construction RFP (Rule 1.4.8.12.(D)(3)(c)(ix), NMAC):

          Experience Modification Rate (EMR): The insurance industry uses this multiplier for
           workers’ compensation claims records.

          Recordable Incidents Rate (IR Rate):             The Occupational Safety and Health
           Administration (OSHA) calculates this rate as the number of recordable incidents
           multiplied by 200,000 divided by the total number of employee hours worked in a year.
           Severity of the incidents is not accounted for in this measure.

          Total Lost Workday Incident Rates: Calculate this rate by the number of lost-time
           injuries and illnesses x 200,000 ÷ total hours worked.

          Safety Plan: The evaluation committee should have the expertise and time to evaluate
           the nuances of submitted plans if requesting a site specific Safety Plan as part of a
           construction proposal. Safety Plans should not be evaluated on a pass/fail rule.

          Sample questions:

              o    Is the firm free of serious or willful violations of federal or state safety laws as
                   determined by a final non-appealable decision of a court or government? If no,
                   explain.
              o    Has the firm had any federal or state safety fines or jobsite fatalities in the last
                   three years? If yes, explain.


                                         15
                             Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

                      When determining points above the minimum 20% of non-price criteria to
                      allot to the Health and Safety Record category, a state agency and evaluation
                      committee must consider whether the project will involve occupied facilities,
                      new construction on a vacant lot, or highly technical work that could represent
                      additional hazards.

              6.      Preference: Include in this section the number of points to be allotted for a
                      resident preference, how those points can be obtained, and how they will be
                      factored into the scoring of the proposals. A state agency must include a
                      veterans preference in accordance with state statutes, which can be awarded
                      to offerors who have met the requirements.6

              7.      Price (X Points): Provide requirements for the relative value of price in
                      relation to non-price criteria.

         H. General Requirements: Provide the general legal terms and conditions relevant
            to procurement and subsequent contract, if awarded. State clearly the legal basis for
            the procurement, whether the State of New Mexico Procurement Code or the
            procurement code of the state agency.7 Use Exhibit A, Sample RFP Template,
            Section C, as a guide for state agencies to develop their own general requirements.

         I. Appendices: Instruct offeror to provide in an Appendix items such as additional
            certificates, reports, forms, or information required as part of the procurement.
            Examples include: Acknowledgement of Receipt form, Campaign Contribution
            Disclosure form, New Mexico Employees Health Coverage form, Letter of
            Transmittal form, Resident Veterans Certification, Reference Questionnaire, and
            Conflict of Interest Affidavit.

         J. Additional Requirements for Construction Projects:

              Security and Bonds                                          Subcontractor Listing Form
              General Contractor’s Statement of                           Subcontractor’s Statement of
              Qualifications                                              Qualifications
              Resident Business Certificate                               Resident Contractor’s Certificate
              Notarized Declaration of Surety                             Copy of Firm’s Written Safety Plan
              Letter(s) from Insurance Carriers                           Written Assurance Program
              Affirmative Action Policy              Management Plan
              Projects Currently Under Contract >$1m Affidavit of Non-Violation of Labor Codes

6
 Application of preferences and Resident business, resident veteran business, resident contractor and resident veteran contractor
certification, NMSA 1978, §§13-1-21, 22, respectively, and Resident contractor defined; application of preference, NMSA 1978,
§13-4-2
7
 Application (Competitive Sealed Proposal Procedures for Construction and Facility Maintenance, Service and Repairs, Rule
1.4.8.8 (C), NMAC

                                                                16
        THIS PAGE: ONE SIDED

    Exhibit A: Sample RFP Template


  STATE PURCHASING DIVISION
              OF THE
 GENERAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
               AND
   <Insert State agency Name>

REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP)


    <Insert RFP Name>




               RFP#

                 17
                                 Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

                                                   <Insert RFP Number>

                                                   <Insert Release Date>

                                                      <Insert Due Date>
 Table of Contents


 I. INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 3a
    A. PURPOSE OF THIS REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS……………………………………………………...3a
    B. BACKGROUND INFORMATION………………………………………………………………………………3a
    C. SCOPE OF PROCUREMENT…………………………………………………………………………………….3a
    D. PROCUREMENT MANAGER ……………………………………………………………………………..…. 3a
    E. DEFINITIONS OF TERMINOLOGY……………………………………………………………………………3a
    F. PROCUREMENT LIBRARY……………………………………………………………………………………….5a
II. CONDITIONS GOVERNING THE PROCUREMENT…………………………………………………..……5a
    A. SEQUENCE OF EVENTS ………………………………………………………..…………………….…………5a
    B. EXPLANATION OF EVENTS……………………………………………………………………..………………6a
    C. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS ………………………………………………………..…………………….…….8a
 III.      RESPONSE FORMAT AND ORGANIZATION …………………………………………………………………………15a

    A. NUMBER OF RESPONSES ..................................................................................................... 15a
    B. NUMBER OF COPIES............................................................................................................. 15a
        C. PROPOSAL FORMAT ........................................................................................................... 16a
 IV. SPECIFICATIONS ..................................................................................................................... 17a
        A.TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS .............................................................................................. 17a
        B. BUSINESS SPECIFICATIONS ................................................................................................. 18a
V. EVALUATION .. ......................................................................................................................... 19a
   A. Evaluation Point Summary .....………………………………………………………………………………….……19a
    B. Evaluation Factors ………………………………………………………………………………………….…………….20a
    C. EVALUATION PROCESS ........................................................................................................ 21a


 APPENDIX A: Acknowledgement of Receipt of Request for Proposals form............................. 22a
 APPENDIX B: Campaign Contribution Disclosure form .............................................................. 23a
 APPENDIX C: Statewide Price Agreement Terms and Conditions ............................................. 25a

                                                                     1a
                           Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

APPENDIX D: Cost Response form ............................................................................................. 26a
APPENDIX E: New Mexico Employees Health Coverage form ................................................... 27a
APPENDIX F: Letter of Transmittal form .................................................................................... 28a
APPENDIX G: Reference Questionnaire ..................................................................................... 30a
APPENDIX H: Resident Veterans Certification ………………………………………………………………….…. 33a
APPENDIX I: Conflict of Interest Affidavit …..…..……………………………………………………….…………..34a




                                                              2a
                      Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

I. INTRODUCTION
A.     PURPOSE OF THIS REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
The purpose of the Request for Proposal (RFP) is to solicit sealed proposals to establish a contract
through competitive negotiations for the purchase of <Insert what you are buying and what it is to do>

B.     BACKGROUND INFORMATION
<Insert Background information that led up to the reason your State agency is doing this procurement.>

C.     SCOPE OF PROCUREMENT
<Insert scope of procurement; what you are looking to purchase and why>

D.     PROCUREMENT MANAGER
1.       <State agency name> has assigned a Procurement Manager who is responsible for the conduct
of this procurement whose name, address, telephone number and e-mail address are listed below:

       Name:           <State agency Persons name>, Procurement Manager
       Address:        <State agency Name and address>
       Telephone:
       Fax:
       Email:

2.     All deliveries of responses via express carrier must be addressed as follows:
       Name:                    <Procurement Manager c/o SPD Assigned Buyer>

       Reference RFP Name: <Name and number of RFP>

       Address:                  State Purchasing Division
                                 1100 St. Francis Dr. Room 2016
                                 Santa Fe, New Mexico 87505

3.     Any inquiries or requests regarding this procurement should be submitted, in writing, to the
Procurement Manager. Offerors may contact ONLY the Procurement Manager regarding this
procurement. Other state employees or Evaluation Committee members do not have the authority to
respond on behalf of the SPD.

E.     DEFINITION OF TERMINOLOGY
This section contains definitions of terms used throughout this procurement document, including
appropriate abbreviations: <Make sure these fit your RFP and add, change or delete anything that
applies>

Agreement Administrator: the State Purchasing Division of the General Service Department
Authorized Purchaser: an individual authorized by a Participating Entity to place orders against this
contract
Business Hours: 8:00 AM thru 5:00 PM Mountain Standard or Mountain Daylight Time, whichever is in
effect on the date given

                                                  3a
                      Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

Close of Business: 5:00 PM Mountain Standard or Daylight Time, whichever is in use on the date given
Contract: a written agreement for the procurement of items of tangible personal property, services, or
professional services
Contractor: the successful Offeror who enters into a Price Agreement with SPD
Desirable: the terms "may," "can," "should," "preferably," or "prefers" identify a desirable or
discretionary item or factor
Determination: the written documentation of a decision of a procurement manager, including findings
of fact required to support a decision. A determination becomes part of the procurement file.
Evaluation Committee: a body appointed by the Procurement Manager to perform the evaluation of
Offerors’ proposals
Evaluation Committee Report: a report prepared by the Procurement Manager and the Evaluation
Committee for contract award that will contain written determinations resulting from the procurement.
Finalist: an Offeror and/or Offerors who meet all the mandatory specifications of this Request for
Proposals and whose score on evaluation factors is sufficiently high to merit further consideration by the
Evaluation Committee
Hourly Rate: the proposed fully loaded maximum hourly rates that include travel, per diem, fringe
benefits, and any overhead costs for contractor personnel as well as subcontractor personnel, if
appropriate
IT: Information Technology
LPB: local public body
Mandatory: the terms "must," "shall," "will," "is required," or "are required" identify a mandatory item
or factor. Failure to meet a mandatory item or factor will result in the rejection of the Offeror’s
proposal as nonresponsive.
Multiple Source Award: an award of an indefinite quantity contract for one or more similar services to
more than one Offeror
Offeror: any person, corporation, or partnership who chooses to submit a proposal
Price Agreement: a definite quantity contract or indefinite quantity contract that requires the
contractor to furnish services to the Procuring State agency
Procurement Manager: the person or designee authorized to manage or administer a procurement
requiring the evaluation of competitive sealed proposals
Procuring State agency: any governmental state agency procuring services or goods from the Statewide
Price Agreement
Project: a temporary process undertaken to achieve a well-defined goal or objective with clearly
defined start and end times, a set of clearly defined tasks, and a budget. The project terminates once
the project scope is completed and project acceptance is given by the project executive sponsor.
Project Manager: means a Procuring State agency employee assigned by the Procuring State agency to
oversee the contract work.
Request for Proposals or RFP: all documents, including those attached or incorporated by reference,
used for soliciting proposals
Responsible Offeror: an Offeror submitting a responsive proposal and who has furnished, when
required, information and data to prove that its financial resources, production or service facilities,
personnel, service reputation, and experience are adequate to make satisfactory delivery of the services
described in the proposal.
Responsive Offer or Responsive Proposal: an offer or proposal that conforms in all material respects to
the requirements set forth in a request for proposals. Material respects of a request for proposals
include but are not limited to price, quality, quantity, or delivery requirements.
Solicited and Awarded: an Invitation to Bid or RFP was made available to the general public, through
any means.

                                                   4a
                            Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

SPA: Statewide Price Agreement entered into by SPD for agencies to use to enter into contracts
SPD: State Purchasing Division of the New Mexico General Services Department.
Staff: a full-time, part-time, or an independently contracted employee with the Offerors’ company
State (the State): the State of New Mexico
State agency: the State Purchasing Division of the General Services Department
State Entity: any state entity that is eligible under the procurement code to use the Statewide Price
Agreement
State Purchasing Agent: the purchasing agent for the State or a designated representative
WSCA: Westerns States Contracting Alliance.

F.       PROCUREMENT LIBRARY
A procurement library has been established. Offerors are encouraged to review the material contained
in the Procurement Library by selecting the link provided in the electronic version of this document
through your own internet connection or by contacting the Procurement Manager and scheduling an
appointment. The library contains information listed below:

Procurement Regulations and Request for Proposal – RFP instructions:
http://www.generalservices.state.nm.us/statepurchasing/.

<Add info here if you are posting additional documents to your website>

II. CONDITIONS GOVERNING THE PROCUREMENT
This section of the RFP contains the schedule, description, and conditions governing the procurement.

A.       SEQUENCE OF EVENTS
The Procurement Manager will make every effort to adhere to the following schedule:

     Action                            Responsible Party            Due Dates Sample Time Frames

     1. Issue RFP                       SPD                         T-0

     2. Distribution List               SPD                         T-10

     3. Pre-Proposal Conference         SPD                         T-10

     4. Deadline to submit             Potential Offerors           T-12
        Questions
     5. Response to Written            Procurement Manager          T-14
        Questions
     5. Submission of Proposal         Potential Offerors           T-21

     6. Proposal Evaluation            Evaluation Committee         T-21 to T-28

     7. Selection of Finalists         Evaluation Committee         T-30

     8. Oral Presentation              Finalist Offerors            T-31


                                                   5a
                        Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

     9. Best and Final Offers           Finalist Offerors            T-34

     10. Finalize Price Agreements      SPD/Finalist Offerors        T-35 to T-39

     11. Price Agreement Awards         SPD/ Finalist Offerors       T-39

     12. Protest Deadline               SPD                          +15 days


B.       EXPLANATION OF EVENTS
The following paragraphs describe the activities listed in the sequence of events shown in Section II,
Paragraph A, above.

1.       Issuance of RFP
         This RFP is being issued on behalf of the New Mexico State < Insert State agency Name>on
         <Insert Date>.

2.       Distribution List Response Due
         Potential Offerors should hand deliver, return by facsimile, registered or certified mail the
         Acknowledgement of Receipt of Request for Proposals form that accompanies this document,
         APPENDIX A, to have their organization placed on the procurement distribution list. The form
         should be signed by an authorized representative of the organization, dated and returned to the
         Procurement Manager by 3:00 pm MST or MDT on <Enter date>.

         The procurement distribution list will be used for the distributing written responses to
         questions. Failure to return the Acknowledgement of Receipt of Request for Proposals form
         shall constitute a presumption of receipt and rejection of the RFP, and the potential Offeror’ s
         organization name shall not appear on the distribution list.

3.       Pre-Proposal Conference
         A pre-proposal conference will be held as indicated in the sequence of events beginning at
         <Enter time>Mountain Standard Time/Daylight Time in the <Enter Location and address>
         Potential Offeror(s) are encouraged to submit written questions in advance of the conference to
         the Procurement Manager (see Section I, Paragraph D). The identity of the organization
         submitting the question(s) will not be revealed. Additional written questions may be submitted
         at the conference. All written questions will be addressed in writing on the date listed in the
         Sequence of Events. A public log will be kept of the names of potential Offeror(s) that attended
         the pre-proposal conference.

         Attendance at the pre-proposal conference is highly recommended but not always a
         prerequisite for submission of a proposal. Some may be mandatory.

4.       Deadline to Submit Written Questions
         Potential Offerors may submit written questions to the Procurement Manager with the intent
         to clarify the RFP until <Insert time>Mountain Standard Time/Daylight Time as indicated in the

                                                    6a
                   Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

     sequence of events. All written questions must be addressed to the Procurement Manager as
     declared in Section I, Paragraph D.

5.   Response to Written Questions
     Written responses to written questions will be distributed as indicated in the sequence of
     events to all potential Offerors whose organization name appears on the procurement
     distribution list. An e-mail copy will be sent to all Offeror’s that provide Acknowledgement of
     Receipt forms described in II.B.2 before the deadline. Additional copies will be posted to:
     http://www.generalservices.state.nm.us/statepurchasing/

6.   Submission of Proposal
     All offeror proposals must be received for review and evaluation by the procurement manager
     or designee no later than 3:00 pm mountain standard time/daylight time on <Insert date>.
     Proposals received after this deadline will not be accepted. The date and time of receipt will be
     recorded on each proposal.

     Proposals must be addressed and delivered to the Procurement Manager at the address listed in
     Section I, Paragraph D2. Proposals must be sealed and labeled on the outside of the package to
     clearly indicate that they are in response to the< Enter Name of RFP and Number>. Proposals
     submitted by facsimile, or other electronic means, will not be accepted.

     A public log will be kept of the names of all offeror organizations that submitted proposals.
     Pursuant to Section NMSA 1978, §13-1-116, the contents of proposals shall not be disclosed to
     competing potential offerors during the negotiation process. The negotiation process is
     deemed to be in effect until the contract awarded pursuant to the Request for Proposals has
     been fully executed.

7.   Proposal Evaluation
     An Evaluation Committee will perform the evaluation of proposals. This process will take place
     as indicated in the Sequence of Events, depending on the number of proposals received. During
     this time, the Procurement Manager may initiate discussions with Offerors who submit
     responsive or potentially responsive proposals for the purpose of clarifying aspects of the
     proposals. Proposals may be accepted and evaluated without such discussion. Discussions
     SHALL NOT be initiated by the Offerors.

8.   Selection of Finalists
     The Evaluation Committee will select and the Procurement Manager will notify the finalist
     Offerors as per schedule Section II, A. Sequence of Events, or as soon thereafter as possible. A
     schedule for the oral presentation and demonstration will be determined at this time.

9.   Oral Presentations
     Finalist Offerors may be required to make an oral presentation at a location to be determined as
     per schedule Section II, A. Sequence of Events, or as soon thereafter as possible. Whether or not
     oral presentations will be held is at the discretion of the Evaluation Committee and SPD.

                                                7a
                       Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

10.     Best and Final Offers
        Finalist Offerors may be asked to submit revisions to their proposals for the purpose of
        obtaining best and final offers by as per schedule Section II, A. Sequence of Events, or as soon
        thereafter as possible. Best and final offers may also be clarified and amended at finalist
        Offerors’ oral presentation

11.     Finalize Statewide Price Agreements
        The SPA will be finalized with the most advantageous Offerors as per schedule Section II, A.
        Sequence of Events, or as soon thereafter as possible. This date is subject to change at the
        discretion of the State Purchasing Division. In the event that mutually agreeable terms cannot
        be reached within the time specified, the State Purchasing Division reserves the right to finalize
        a SPA with the next most advantageous Offerors without undertaking a new procurement
        process.

12.     Price Agreement Awards
        After review of the Evaluation Committee Report and the signed SPA, SPD will award the SPA as
        per the schedule in Section II, A. Sequence of Events, or as soon thereafter as possible. This
        date is subject to change at the discretion of the State Purchasing Division. The contract shall be
        awarded to the Offerors whose proposals are most advantageous to the State of New Mexico
        and <Enter Department Name>, taking into consideration the weighted evaluation factors set
        forth in the RFP. The most advantageous proposal may or may not have received the most
        points. The award is subject to appropriate Department and State approval.

13.     Protest Deadline
        Any protest by an Offeror must be timely and in conformance with Section 13-1-172 NMSA
        1978, and applicable procurement regulations. The fifteen (15) calendar day protest period
        shall begin on the day following the award of SPAs and will end at 5:00 pm Mountain Standard
        Time/Daylight Time on the 15th day. Protests must be written and must include the name and
        address of the protestor and the request for proposal number. It must also contain a statement
        of the grounds for protest, including appropriate supporting exhibits and must specify the ruling
        requested from the State Purchasing Agent. The protest must be delivered to:

        Lawrence O. Maxwell, State Purchasing Agent
        State Purchasing Division
        1100 St. Francis Dr., Room 2016
        Santa Fe, NM 87505

If this is an RFP your State agency is doing, you must list your GC.
Protests received after the deadline will not be accepted.

C.      GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

1.      Acceptance of Conditions Governing the Procurement
        Potential Offerors must indicate their acceptance of the Conditions Governing the Procurement
        section in the letter of transmittal. Submission of a proposal constitutes acceptance of the
        Evaluation Factors contained in Section V of this RFP.


                                                     8a
                   Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

2.   Incurring Cost
     Any cost incurred by the potential Offeror in preparation, transmittal, and/or presentation of
     any proposal or material submitted in response to this RFP shall be borne solely by the Offeror.

     Any cost incurred by the Offeror for set up and demonstrate proposed equipment and/or
     system shall be borne solely by the Offeror.

3.   Prime Contractor Responsibility
     Any SPA that may result from this RFP shall specify that the prime contractor is solely
     responsible for fulfillment of any contract with a state agency that may derive from this RFP.
     The state agency hiring a vendor from the SPA will make payments only to the prime contractor.

4.   Subcontractors
     The use of subcontractors is allowed. The prime contractor shall be wholly responsible for the
     entire performance of the SPA whether or not subcontractors are used. Additionally, the prime
     contractor must receive approval, in writing, from the state agency hiring from the SPA before
     any subcontractor is used during the term of this agreement.

5.   Amended Proposals
     An Offeror may submit an amended proposal before the deadline for receipt of proposals. Such
     amended proposals must be complete replacements for a previously submitted proposal and
     must be identified clearly as such in the transmittal letter. The State agency personnel will not
     merge, collate, or assemble proposal materials.

6.   Offerors Rights to Withdraw Proposal
     Offerors will be allowed to withdraw their proposals at any time prior to the deadline for receipt
     of proposals. The Offeror must submit a written withdrawal request addressed to the
     Procurement Manager and signed by the Offeror’ s duly authorized representative.

     The approval or denial of withdrawal requests received after the deadline for receipt of the
     proposals is governed by the applicable procurement regulations.

7.   Proposal Offer Firm
     Responses to this RFP, including proposal prices for services, will be considered firm for one
     hundred twenty (120) days after the due date for receipt of proposals or ninety (90) days after
     the due date for the receipt of a best and final offer, if the Offeror is invited or required to
     submit one.

8.   Disclosure of Proposal Contents
     The proposals will be kept confidential until negotiations are completed by SPD. At that time,
     all proposals and documents pertaining to the proposals will be open to the public, except for
     material that is clearly marked proprietary or confidential. The Procurement Manager will not
     disclose or make public any pages of a proposal on which the potential Offeror has stamped or
     imprinted "proprietary" or "confidential" subject to the following requirements.


                                                9a
                    Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

      Proprietary or confidential data shall be readily separable from the proposal in order to
      facilitate eventual public inspection of the non-confidential portion of the proposal.
      Confidential data is normally restricted to confidential financial information concerning the
      Offeror’ s organization and data that qualifies as a trade secret in accordance with the Uniform
      Trade Secrets Act, NMSA 1978, §57-3A-1 through §57-3A-7. The price of products offered or
      the cost of services proposed shall not be designated as proprietary or confidential information.

      If a request is received for disclosure of data for which an Offeror has made a written request
      for confidentiality, SPD shall examine the Offeror’ s request and make a written determination
      that specifies which portions of the proposal should be disclosed. Unless the Offeror takes legal
      action to prevent the disclosure, the proposal will be so disclosed. The proposal shall be open
      to public inspection subject to any continuing prohibition on the disclosure of confidential data.

9.    No Obligation
      This procurement in no manner obligates the State or any of its agencies to the use of Offeror
      services until a valid written contract is awarded and approved by appropriate authorities.

10.   Termination
      This RFP may be canceled at any time and any and all proposals may be rejected in whole or in
      part when SPD determines such action to be in the best interest of the State.

11.   Sufficient Appropriation
      Any SPA or contract awarded as a result of this RFP process may be terminated if sufficient
      appropriations or authorizations do not exist. Such terminations will be effected by sending
      written notice to the contractor. The State agency’s decision as to whether sufficient
      appropriations and authorizations are available will be accepted by the contractor as final.

12.   Legal Review
      The State agency requires that all Offerors agree to be bound by the General Requirements
      contained in this RFP. Any Offeror concerns must be provided promptly in writing to the
      attention of the Procurement Manager.

13.   Governing Law
      This procurement and any agreement with an Offeror that may result from this procurement
      shall be governed by the laws of the State.

14.   Basis for Proposal
      Only information supplied, in writing, by the State agency through the Procurement Manager or
      in this RFP should be used as the basis for the preparation of Offeror proposals. Current and
      updated information regarding this procurement is available on the SPD website at
      http://www.generalservices.state.nm.us/statepurchasing/.




                                                10a
                    Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

15.   Contract Terms and Conditions
      The contract between a State agency using the contract and the associated contractor will
      follow the format specified by the State agency and contain the terms and conditions set forth
      in "State of New Mexico.” The contracting state agency reserves the right, however, to
      negotiate with an Offeror provisions in addition to those contained in this RFP. The contents of
      this RFP, as revised and/or supplemented, and the successful Offeror’s proposal will be
      incorporated into and become part of the resultant Contract.

      Should an Offeror object to any of the terms and conditions in APPENDIX C, Statewide Price
      Agreement Terms and Conditions, the Offeror must propose specific alternative language. The
      State agency may or may not accept the alternative language. General references to the
      Offeror’s terms and conditions or attempts at complete substitutions are not acceptable to the
      State agency and will result in disqualification of the Offeror’s proposal.

      Offerors must provide a brief discussion of the purpose and impact, if any, of each proposed
      change followed by the specific proposed alternate wording.

16.   Offeror’s Terms and Conditions
      Offerors must submit with the proposal a complete set of any additional terms and conditions
      they expect to have included in a contract negotiated with the State agency.

17.   Contract Deviations
      Any additional terms and conditions, which may be the subject of negotiation, will be discussed
      only between the State agency and the Offeror selected from the SPA and shall not be deemed
      an opportunity to amend the Offeror’s proposal.

18.   Offeror Qualifications
      The Evaluation Committee may make such investigations as necessary to determine the ability
      of the potential Offeror to adhere to the requirements specified within this RFP. The Evaluation
      Committee will reject the proposal of any potential Offeror who is not a Responsible Offeror or
      fails to submit a responsive offer as defined in NMSA 1978, §§13-1-83 and 13-1-85.

19.   Right to Waive Minor Irregularities
      The Evaluation Committee reserves the right to waive minor irregularities as well as mandatory
      requirements, provided that all of the otherwise responsive proposals failed to meet the same
      mandatory requirements and that the failure to do so does not otherwise materially affect the
      procurement. This right is at the sole discretion of the Evaluation Committee.

20.   Change in Contractor Representatives
      The State agency reserves the right to require a change in contractor representatives if the
      assigned representatives are not, in the opinion of the State agency, meeting its needs
      adequately.



                                                11a
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

21.   Notice
      The Procurement Code, NMSA 1978, §13-1-28 through §13-1-199, imposes civil and
      misdemeanor criminal penalties for its violation. In addition, the New Mexico criminal statutes
      impose felony penalties for bribes, gratuities, and kickbacks.

22.   State Agency Rights
      The State agency in agreement with the Evaluation Committee reserves the right to accept all or
      a portion of a potential Offeror’s proposal.

23.   Right to Publish
      Throughout the duration of this procurement process and contract term, Offerors and
      contractors must secure written approval prior to the release of any information that pertains to
      the potential work or activities covered by this procurement and/or state agency contracts
      deriving from this procurement from SPD and the Contract Lead. Failure to adhere to this
      requirement may result in disqualification of the Offeror’s proposal or removal from the SPA.

24.   Ownership of Proposals
      All documents submitted in response to the RFP shall become property of the State.

25.   Confidentiality
      Any confidential information provided to, or developed by, the contractor in the performance of
      the contract resulting from this RFP shall be kept confidential and shall not be made available to
      any individual or organization by the contractor without the prior written approval of SPD.

      The Contractor(s) shall agree to protect the confidentiality of all confidential information and
      not to publish or disclose such information to any third party without first procuring SPD's
      written permission.

26.   Electronic mail address required
      A large part of the communications regarding this procurement will be conducted by electronic
      mail (e-mail). Offeror must have and provide a valid e-mail address to receive this
      correspondence. (See also, Section II.B.5, Response to Written Questions).

27.   Use of Electronic Versions of this RFP
      This RFP is being made available by electronic means. If accepted by such means, the Offeror
      acknowledges and accepts full responsibility to insure that no changes are made to the RFP. In
      the event of conflict between a version of the RFP in the Offeror’s possession and the version
      maintained by the SPA, the version maintained by the SPA shall govern. Refer to:
      http://www.generalservices.state.nm.us/statepurchasing/.

28.   New Mexico Employees Health Coverage
      1. For all contracts solicited and awarded on or after January 1, 2008: If the Offeror has, or
      grows to, six (6) or more employees who work, or who are expected to work, an average of at
      least 20 hours per week over a six (6) month period during the term of the contract, Offeror
      must agree to:

                                                 12a
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

      (a) have in place, and agree to maintain for the term of the contract, health insurance for those
      employees and offer that health insurance to those employees no later than July 1, 2008, if the
      expected annual value in the aggregate of any and all contracts between Contractor and the
      State exceed one million dollars or;

      (b) have in place, and agree to maintain for the term of the contract, health insurance for those
      employees and offer that health insurance to those employees no later than July 1, 2009, if the
      expected annual value in the aggregate of any and all contracts between Contractor and the
      State exceed $500,000 dollars or

      (c) have in place, and agree to maintain for the term of the contract, health insurance for those
      employees and offer that health insurance to those employees no later than July 1, 2010, if the
      expected annual value in the aggregate of any and all contracts between Contractor and the
      State exceed $250,000 dollars.

      2. Offeror must agree to maintain a record of the number of employees who have (a) accepted
      health insurance; (b) decline health insurance due to other health insurance coverage already in
      place; or (c) decline health insurance for other reasons. These records are subject to review and
      audit by a representative of the state.

      3. Offeror must agree to advise all employees of the availability of State publicly financed health
      care coverage programs by providing each employee with, as a minimum, the following web site
      link to additional information http://insurenewmexico.state.nm.us/.

      4. For Indefinite Quantity, Indefinite Delivery contracts (price agreements without specific
      limitations on quantity and providing for an indeterminate number of orders to be placed
      against it), these requirements shall apply the first day of the second month after the Offeror
      reports combined sales (from State and, if applicable, from LPBs if from a state price agreement)
      of $250,000, $500,000 or $1,000,000.

29.   Campaign Contribution Disclosure Form
      Offeror must complete, sign, and return the Campaign Contribution Disclosure Form (See
      APPENDIX B) as a part of its proposal. This requirement applies regardless of whether a covered
      contribution was made or not made for the positions of Governor and Lieutenant Governor.
      Failure to complete and return the signed, unaltered form will result in disqualification.

30.   Pay Equity Reporting Requirements
      If the Offeror has ten (10) or more employees OR eight (8) or more employees in the same job
      classification, Offeror must complete and submit the required reporting form (PE10-249) if they
      are awarded a contract.

      For contracts that extend beyond one (1) calendar year, or are extended beyond one (1) calendar
      year, Offeror must also agree to complete and submit the required form annually within thirty
      (30) calendar days of the annual bid or proposal submittal anniversary date and, if more than
      180 days has elapsed since submittal of the last report, at the completion of the contract.

                                                 13a
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

      Should Offeror not meet the size requirement for reporting at contract award but subsequently
      grows so that they meet or exceed the size requirement for reporting, Offeror must agree to
      provide the required report within ninety (90) calendar days of meeting or exceeding the size
      requirement.

      Offeror must also agree to levy these reporting requirements on any subcontractor(s)
      performing more than 10% of the dollar value of this contract if said subcontractor(s) meets, or
      grows to meet, the stated employee-size thresholds during the term of the contract. Offeror
      must further agree that, should one or more subcontractors not meet the size requirement for
      reporting at contract award but subsequently grow such that they meet or exceed the size
      requirement for reporting, Offeror will submit the required report, for each such subcontractor,
      within ninety (90) calendar days of that subcontractor’s meeting or exceeding the size
      requirement.

31.   Disclosure Regarding Responsibility
      Any prospective Responsible Bidder/Offeror (hereafter Offeror) and/or any of its Principals who
      seek to enter into a contract greater than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) with any State
      agency or LPB for professional services, tangible personal property, services, or construction
      agrees to disclose whether they, or any principal of their company:

      1. are presently debarred, suspended, proposed for debarment, or declared ineligible for
         award of contract by any federal entity, State agency or LPB;

      2. have, within a three-year period preceding this offer, been convicted of or had civil
         judgment rendered against them for: commission of fraud or a criminal offense in
         connection with obtaining, attempting to obtain, or performing a public (federal, state or
         local) contract or subcontract; violation of federal or state antitrust statutes related to the
         submission of offers; or commission in any federal or state jurisdiction of embezzlement,
         theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, making false statements, tax
         evasion, violation of federal criminal tax law, or receiving stolen property;

      3. are presently indicted for, or otherwise criminally or civilly charged by any (federal state or
         local) government entity with, commission of any of the offenses enumerated in paragraph
         2 of this disclosure.

      4. have, preceding this offer, been notified of any delinquent federal or state taxes in an
         amount that exceeds $3,000.00, of which the liability remains unsatisfied

          a) Taxes are considered delinquent if both of the following criteria apply:
                i.   The tax liability is finally determined. The liability is finally determined if it has
                     been assessed. A liability is not finally determined if there is a pending
                     administrative or judicial challenge.
               ii.   In the case of a judicial challenge of the liability, the liability is not finally
                     determined until all judicial appeal rights have been exhausted

          b) The taxpayer is delinquent in making payment. A taxpayer is delinquent if the
             taxpayer has failed to pay the tax liability when full payment was due and
                                                   14a
                       Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

                required. A taxpayer is not delinquent in cases where enforced collection action
                is precluded.

        5. Have, within a three-year period preceding this offer, had one or more contracts terminated
           for default by any federal or state agency or local public body. Principal, for the purpose of
           this disclosure, means an officer, director, owner, partner, or a person having primary
           management or supervisory responsibilities within a business entity or related entities. The
           Offeror shall provide immediate written notice to the Procurement Manager or Buyer if, at
           any time prior to contract award, the Offeror learns that its disclosure was erroneous when
           submitting or became erroneous by reason of changed circumstances. A disclosure that any
           of the items in this requirement exist will not necessarily result in withholding an award
           under this solicitation. However, the disclosure will be considered in the determination of
           the Offeror’s responsibility. Failure of the Offeror to furnish a disclosure or provide
           additional information as requested will render the Offeror nonresponsive.

        6. Nothing contained in the foregoing shall be construed to require establishing a system of
           records in order to render in good faith the disclosure required by this document. The
           knowledge and information of an Offeror is not required to exceed that which is the
           normally possessed by a prudent person in the ordinary course of business dealings. The
           disclosure requirement provided is a material representation of fact upon which reliance
           was placed when making an award and is a continuing material representation of the
           facts. If, during the performance of the contract, the contractor is indicted for or otherwise
           criminally or civilly charged by any government entity (federal, state, or local) with
           commission of any offenses named in this document the contractor must provide
           immediate written notice to the Procurement Manager or Buyer. If it is later determined
           that the Offeror knowingly rendered an erroneous disclosure, in addition to other remedies
           available to the government, the SPA or Central Purchasing Officer may terminate the
           involved contract for cause. Still further, the SPA or Central Purchasing Officer may suspend
           or debar the contractor from eligibility for future solicitations until such time as the matter
           is resolved to the satisfaction of the State Purchasing Agent or Central Purchasing Officer.

32. Conflict of Interest
     The Offeror warrants that it presently has no interest and shall not acquire any interest, direct or
     indirect, that would conflict in any manner or degree with the performance or services required
     under the Agreement. The Offeror certifies that the requirements of the Governmental Conduct
     Act, NMSA 1978, §10-16-1 through §10-16-18, regarding contracting with a public officer or state
     employee or former state employee have been followed.



III. RESPONSE FORMAT AND ORGANIZATION
A.      NUMBER OF RESPONSES
Potential Offerors shall submit only one proposal for this RFP.

B.      NUMBER OF COPIES
Offerors shall deliver one (1) original and <#> identical copies (<#> total) of their proposals (Binder 1),
one (1) original and <#> identical copies of cost proposal (Binder 2) and <#> electronic version of the

                                                     15a
                       Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

proposal containing both Binders and all Confidential Information separated on the electronic version
(must mirror the hard copy submitted) to the location specified in Section I, Paragraph D on or before
the closing date and time for receipt of proposals.

C.      PROPOSAL FORMAT
All proposals must be submitted as follows:

Typewritten on standard 8 ½ x 11 inch paper (larger paper is permissible for charts, spreadsheets, etc.)
and placed within binders with tabs delineating each section.

1.      Proposal Content and Organization
        Direct reference to pre-prepared or promotional material may be used if referenced and clearly
        marked. Promotional material should be minimal. The proposal must be organized and
        indexed in the following format and must contain, at a minimum, all listed items in the
        sequence indicated.

        Binder 1:

            a)   Signed Letter of Transmittal
            c)   Table of Contents
            d)   Proposal Summary (Optional)
            e)   Response to Specifications with the exception of cost
            f)   Response to SPA Terms and Conditions
            g)   Offeror’s Additional Terms and Conditions

        Binder 2:
            g) Completed Cost Response Form
            h) Campaign Contribution Form
            i) Signed Employee Health Coverage Form
            j) Signed Affidavit pursuant to Governmental Conduct Act (If applies)
            k) Resident Vendor or Resident Veteran Certificate (If applies)
            l) Resident Veterans Preference Certification (If applies)
            m) Conflict of Interest Affidavit (If applies)
            n) Other Supporting Material (Optional)

        Within each section of the proposal, Offerors should address the items in the order in which
        they appear in this RFP. All forms provided in this RFP must be thoroughly completed and
        included in the appropriate section of the proposal. All discussion of proposed costs, rates, or
        expenses must appear only in Binder 2 on the Cost Response form. Any proposal that does not
        adhere to these requirements may be deemed non-responsive and rejected on that basis.
        The proposal summary may be included by potential Offerors to provide the Evaluation
        Committee with an overview of the proposal; however, this material will not be used in the
        evaluation process unless specifically referenced from other portions of the Offeror’s proposal.

        Offerors may attach other material they believe may improve the quality of their responses.
        However, these materials should be included in Binder 2.

                                                   16a
                      Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

2.      Letter of Transmittal
        The Offeror’s proposal must be accompanied by the Letter of Transmittal form located in
        APPENDIX F. The form must be completed and must be signed by the person authorized to
        obligate the company. The letter of transmittal MUST:

        a)        Identify the submitting organization;
        b)        Identify the name, title, telephone number, and e-mail address of the person authorized
                  by the organization to contractually obligate the organization;
        c)        Identify the name, title, telephone number, and e-mail address of the person authorized
                  to negotiate the contract on behalf of the organization;
        d)        Identify the names, titles, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses of persons to be
                  contacted for clarification;
        e)        Identify if sub-contractors will be used in the performance of the contract award;
        f)        Describe any relationship with any entity that will be used in the performance of this
                  awarded contract;
        g)        Identify the following with a check mark and signature where required:
                i.    Explicitly indicate acceptance of the Conditions Governing the Procurement stated
                  in Section II, Paragraph C.1;
               ii.    Acknowledge acceptance of Section V of this RFP;
              iii.    Acknowledge receipt of any and all amendments to this RFP;
              iv.     Be signed by the person authorized to contractually obligate the organization.


IV. SPECIFICATIONS
Offerors should respond in the form of a thorough narrative to each specification, unless otherwise
specified. The narratives, including required supporting materials will be evaluated and awarded points
accordingly.

A.     TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS This section is used by the State agency to define what
they require of the offerors. Some suggestions below:

1.      Organizational Experience
        Offerors must:

        (a)     provide a description of relevant corporate experience with state government and
                private sector. The experience of all proposed subcontractors must be described. The
                narrative must thoroughly describe how the Offeror has supplied expertise for similar
                contracts and must include the extent of their experience, expertise and knowledge as
                a provider of<what you are asking for>. Al l<what you are asking for> provided to
                private sector will also be considered;
        (b)     indicate how many <what you are asking for> have been installed in the last two years
                and what percentage of business revenue is derived from <what you are asking
                for>engagements;
        (c)     describe at least two project successes and failures of an <what you are asking
                for>engagement. Include how each experience improved the Offeror’s services.


                                                  17a
                   Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

2.   Organizational References
     Vendors should provide a minimum of three (3) references from similar projects performed for
     private State and/or large local government clients within the last three years. Vendors are
     required to submit APPENDIX G, Reference Questionnaire, for the business references they list.
     The business references must submit the Reference Questionnaire directly to the designee
     described in Section I, Paragraph D. It is the vendor’s responsibility to ensure that the
     completed forms are received by or before the proposal submission deadline for inclusion in the
     evaluation process. Business references that are not received in time or are incomplete may
     adversely affect the vendor’s score in the evaluation process. The Evaluation Committee may
     contact any or all business references for validation of information submitted.

             2.1 Client name;
             2.2 Project description;
             2.3 Project dates (starting and ending);
             2.4 Technical environment; (i.e., software applications, Internet capabilities, data
                 communications, network, hardware);
             2.5 Staff assigned to reference engagement that will be designated for work per the
                 RFP;
             2.6 Client project manager name, telephone number, fax number, and e-mail address.

3.   Oral Presentation
     If selected as a finalist, Offerors must agree to provide the Evaluation Committee the
     opportunity to interview proposed staff members identified by the Evaluation Committee, at
     the option of the State agency. The Evaluation Committee may request a finalist to provide an
     oral presentation of the proposal as an opportunity for the Evaluation Committee to ask
     questions and seek clarifications. A statement of concurrence must be submitted in the
     Offerors’ proposal.

B.   BUSINESS SPECIFICATIONS

1.   Cost
     Offerors must complete Cost Response form in APPENDIX D. Cost will be measured by <insert
     your criteria>. All charges listed on APPENDIX D must be justified and evidence of need
     documented in the proposal.

2.   Resident Business or Resident Veteran’s Preference
     To be awarded the points, Offerors must include a copy of their preference certificates in this
     section. In addition for Resident Veterans Preference, the certification form must accompany
     any RFP and any business wishing to receive the preference must complete and sign the form.

3.   Financial Stability
     Offerors must submit copies of the most recent years’ independently audited financial
     statements and the most current 10K, as well as financial statements for the preceding three
     years, if they exist. The submission must include the audit opinion, the balance sheet,
     statements of income, retained earnings, cash flows, and the notes to the financial statements.
                                               18a
                       Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

        If independently audited financial statements do not exist for the Offeror, the Offeror must
        state the reason and, instead, submit sufficient information (e.g., D & B report) to enable the
        Evaluation Committee to assess the financial stability of the Offeror.

4.      Performance Bond
        Offerors must have the ability secure a Performance Bond in favor of the State agency to insure
        the Contractor’s performance under the contract. Each engagement will be different, but the
        option must be available to the Agencies at contract time. A statement of concurrence must be
        submitted in the Offeror’s proposal.

5.      Letter of Transmittal Form
        The Offerors’ proposals must be accompanied by the Letter of Transmittal form, APPENDIX F.
        The form must be completed and signed by the person authorized to obligate the company.

6.      Campaign Contribution Disclosure Form
        The Offeror must complete unaltered Campaign Contribution Disclosure Form and submit a
        signed copy with its proposal. This must be accomplished whether or not an applicable
        contribution has been made. (See APPENDIX B)

7.      Employee Health Coverage Form
        The Offeror must agree with the terms as indicated in APPENDIX E. The unaltered form
        must be completed and signed by the person authorized to obligate the company.

8.      Pay Equity Reporting
        The Offeror must agree with the requirements of reporting as defined in Section II. C. 30. Report
        is due at the time of contract award. A statement of concurrence with this requirement must
        be included in Offeror’s submitted proposal.




V. EVALUATION

A. EVALUATION POINT SUMMARY
The following is a summary of evaluation factors with point values assigned to each. These weighted
factors will be used in the evaluation of individual potential Offeror proposals by sub-category. The table
below is just a sample make sure yours matches your requirements.

        Factor                                                             Points Available
        A    Technical Specifications                                      Points must be assigned and
                                                                           defined for all factors
        A(1)    Organizational Experience
        A(2)    Organizational References
        A(3)    Oral Presentations

        B       Business Specifications
        B(1)    Cost
                                                   19a
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

       B(2)   Financial Stability                                                 Pass/Fail
       B(3)   Performance Bond                                                    Pass/Fail
       B(4)   Letter Of Transmittal                                               Pass/Fail
       B(5)   Campaign Contribution Disclosure Form                               Pass/Fail
       B(6)   Employee Health Coverage Form                                       Pass/Fail
       B(7)   Pay Equity Reporting                                                Pass/Fail
       TOTAL                                                                       1,000 points
       Resident Preference

Table 1: Evaluation Point Summary

B.     EVALUATION FACTORS

1.     A (1) Organizational Experience (See Table 1)
       Points will be awarded based on the thoroughness and clarity of the response, the breadth and
       depth of the engagements cited, and the perceived validity of the response.

2.     A (2) Organizational References (See Table 1)
       Points will be awarded based upon an evaluation of the responses to a series of questions asked
       of the references concerning the quality of the Offeror’s services, the timeliness of services,
       responsiveness to problems and complaints, and the level of satisfaction with the Offeror’s
       overall performance.

3.     A (3) Oral Presentation (See Table 1)
       Points will be awarded based on the quality, organization and effectiveness of communication
       of the information presented, as well as the professionalism of the presenters and technical
       knowledge of the proposed staff. (If no Oral Presentations are required Offerors will receive the
       total points)

4.     B (1) Cost (See Table 1)
       The evaluation of each Offeror’s cost proposal will be conducted using the following formula:

       Lowest Responsive Offer Bid     -------------------------------------------------------X   Award Points

       This Offeror’s Bid

5.     Resident Business or Resident Veterans Preference
       Percent of preference will be determined by Offerors that submit the correct documentation.
       Once the RFP is totally scored, the proper percent of preference will apply to those Offerors that
       qualify. For example, an RFP has a total value of 1000 points. Five proposals are received; one
       from a resident business, one from a resident veterans business with an 8% preference and
       three non-resident businesses. The two preference businesses would receive 50 points for the
       resident preference and 80 points for the resident veterans preference would be added to their
       already evaluated score, making it possible for the highest score total 1080.



                                                    20a
                    Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

6.    B (2) Financial Stability (See Table 1)
      Pass/Fail only. No points assigned.

7.    B (3) Performance Bond (See Table 1)
      Pass/Fail only. No points assigned.

8.    B (4) Letter of Transmittal (See Table 1)
      Pass/Fail only. No points assigned.

9.    B (5) Campaign Contribution Disclosure Form (See Table 1)
      Pass/Fail only. No points assigned.

10.   B (6) Employee Health Coverage Form (See Table 1)
      Pass/Fail only. No points assigned.

11.   B (7) Pay Equity Reporting (See Table 1)
      Pass/Fail only. No points assigned.

C.    EVALUATION PROCESS

1.    All Offeror proposals will be reviewed for compliance with the requirements and specifications
      stated within the RFP. Proposals deemed non-responsive will be eliminated from further
      consideration.

2.    The Procurement Manager may contact the Offeror for clarification of the response as specified
      in Section II, Paragraph B. 6.

3.    The Evaluation Committee may use other sources of information to perform the evaluation as
      specified in Section II, Paragraph C. 18.

4.    Responsive proposals will be evaluated on the factors in Section V, which have been assigned a
      point value. Responsible Offerors with the highest scores will be selected as finalist Offerors
      based upon the proposals submitted. The responsible Offerors whose proposals are most
      advantageous to the State, taking into consideration the evaluation factors in Section V, will be
      recommended for SPA to the State, as specified in Section II, Paragraph B.8. Please note,
      however, that a serious deficiency in the response to any one factor may be grounds for
      rejection regardless of overall score.




                                                21a
                       Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1



APPENDIX A – Acknowledgement of Receipt Form



                                        REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL

                                          <Insert Name of RFP>

                                                <Insert #>



                            ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF RECEIPT FORM
In acknowledgement of receipt of this Request for Proposal the undersigned agrees that s/he has
received a complete copy, beginning with the title page and table of contents, and ending with
APPENDIX I.

The acknowledgement of receipt should be signed and returned to the Procurement Manager no later
than <insert time and date>. Only potential Offerors who elect to return this form completed with the
indicated intention of submitting a proposal will receive copies of all Offeror written questions and the
written responses to those questions as well as RFP amendments, if any are issued.

FIRM: _________________________________________________________________

REPRESENTED BY: _____________________________________________________

TITLE: ________________________________ PHONE NO.: ____________________

E-MAIL: ___________________________            FAX NO.: ________________________

ADDRESS: _____________________________________________________________

CITY: __________________________ STATE: ________ ZIP CODE: _____________

SIGNATURE: ___________________________________ DATE: _________________

This name and address will be used for all correspondence related to the Request for Proposal.

Firm does/does not (circle one) intend to respond to this Request for Proposal.

                               <Insert PM name>, Procurement Manager
                                    <Insert RFP Name and Number>
                                        State Purchasing Division
                                    1100 St. Francis Dr. Room 2016
                                          Santa Fe, NM 87505

                                                   22a
                       Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

                                     Fax:    <Insert PM fax number>
                                    E-mail: <Insert PM email address>


APPENDIX B - Campaign Contribution Disclosure Form

Pursuant to NMSA 1978, §13-1-191.1 (2006), any person seeking to enter into a contract with any state
agency or local public body for professional services, a design and build project delivery system, or the
design and installation of measures the primary purpose of which is to conserve natural resources must
file this form with that state agency or local public body. This form must be filed even if the contract
qualifies as a small purchase or a sole source contract. The prospective contractor must disclose
whether they, a family member or a representative of the prospective contractor has made a campaign
contribution to an applicable public official of the state or a local public body during the two years prior
to the date on which the contractor submits a proposal or, in the case of a sole source or small purchase
contract, the two years prior to the date the contractor signs the contract, if the aggregate total of
contributions given by the prospective contractor, a family member or a representative of the
prospective contractor to the public official exceeds two hundred and fifty dollars ($250) over the two
year period.

Furthermore, the state agency or local public body shall void an executed contract or cancel a
solicitation or proposed award for a proposed contract if: 1) a prospective contractor, a family member
of the prospective contractor, or a representative of the prospective contractor gives a campaign
contribution or other thing of value to an applicable public official or the applicable public official’s
employees during the pendency of the procurement process or 2) a prospective contractor fails to
submit a fully completed disclosure statement pursuant to the law.

THIS FORM MUST BE FILED BY ANY PROSPECTIVE CONTRACTOR WHETHER OR NOT THEY, THEIR FAMILY
MEMBER, OR THEIR REPRESENTATIVE HAS MADE ANY CONTRIBUTIONS SUBJECT TO DISCLOSURE.

The following definitions apply:

“Applicable public official” means a person elected to an office or a person appointed to
complete a term of an elected office, who has the authority to award or influence
the award of the contract for which the prospective contractor is submitting a
competitive sealed proposal or who has the authority to negotiate a sole source or
small purchase contract that may be awarded without submission of a sealed
competitive proposal.

“Campaign Contribution” means a gift, subscription, loan, advance or deposit of money or other thing of
value, including the estimated value of an in-kind contribution, that is made to or received by an
applicable public official or any person authorized to raise, collect or expend contributions on that
official’s behalf for the purpose of electing the official to either statewide or local office. “Campaign
Contribution” includes the payment of a debt incurred in an election campaign, but does not include the
value of services provided without compensation or unreimbursed travel or other personal expenses of
individuals who volunteer a portion or all of their time on behalf of a candidate or political committee,

                                                    23a
                       Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

nor does it include the administrative or solicitation expenses of a political committee that are paid by
an organization that sponsors the committee.

“Family member” means spouse, father, mother, child, father-in-law, mother-in-law,
daughter-in-law or son-in-law.
“Pendency of the procurement process” means the time period commencing with the public notice of
the request for proposals and ending with the award of the contract or the cancellation of the request
for proposals.

“Person” means any corporation, partnership, individual, joint venture, association or any other private
legal entity.

“Prospective contractor” means a person who is subject to the competitive sealed proposal process set
forth in the Procurement Code or is not required to submit a competitive sealed proposal because that
person qualifies for a sole source or a small purchase contract.

“Representative of a prospective contractor” means an officer or director of a corporation, a member or
manager of a limited liability corporation, a partner of a partnership or a trustee of a trust of the
prospective contractor.

DISCLOSURE OF CONTRIBUTIONS:

Contribution Made By:                    __________________________________________

Relation to Prospective Contractor:      __________________________________________

Name of Applicable Public Official:       _________________________________________

Date Contribution(s) Made:               __________________________________________

Amount(s) of Contribution(s)             __________________________________________

Nature of Contribution(s)                __________________________________________

Purpose of Contribution(s)               __________________________________________

(Attach extra pages if necessary)

___________________________        _______________________
Signature                          Date
___________________________Title (position)
                                            —OR—

NO CONTRIBUTIONS IN THE AGGREGATE TOTAL OVER TWO HUNDRED FIFTY DOLLARS ($250) WERE
MADE to an applicable public official by me, a family member or representative.
______________________________                   _______________________
Signature                                        Date

______________________________ Title (Position)

                                                   24a
              Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1


APPENDIX C – Sample Contract


              Sample Contract must be attached here.

    (Please refer to State Purchasing Division website for options)




                                  25a
                   Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1


APPENDIX D – Cost Response Form


                                 Sample Below


Description         Type              Quantity         Cost per
                                                       Item




Based on above requirements and any professional services needed for configuration,
installation and training


Year 1 Cost:                $_________________


Year 2-3 Annual Cost        $_________________
Year 4 and Beyond

Annual Cost:               $_________________

                                          26a
                       Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

APPENDIX E - New Mexico Employees Health Coverage Form

1.        For all contracts solicited and awarded on or after January 1, 2008: If the Offeror has, or grows
to, six (6) or more employees who work, or who are expected to work, an average of at least 20 hours
per week over a six (6) month period during the term of the contract, Offeror must agree to:

(a) have in place, and agree to maintain for the term of the contract, health insurance for those
employees and offer that health insurance to those employees no later than July 1, 2008 if the expected
annual value in the aggregate of any and all contracts between Contractor and the State exceed one
million dollars or;

(b) have in place, and agree to maintain for the term of the contract, health insurance for those
employees and offer that health insurance to those employees no later than July 1, 2009 if the expected
annual value in the aggregate of any and all contracts between Contractor and the State exceed
$500,000 dollars or

(c) have in place, and agree to maintain for the term of the contract, health insurance for those
employees and offer that health insurance to those employees no later than July 1, 2010 if the expected
annual value in the aggregate of any and all contracts between Contractor and the State exceed
$250,000 dollars.

2.       Offeror must agree to maintain a record of the number of employees who have (a) accepted
health insurance; (b) decline health insurance due to other health insurance coverage already in place;
or (c) decline health insurance for other reasons. These records are subject to review and audit by a
representative of the state.

3.      Offeror must agree to advise all employees of the availability of State publicly financed health
care coverage programs by providing each employee with, as a minimum, the following web site link to
additional information http://insurenewmexico.state.nm.us/.

4.       For Indefinite Quantity, Indefinite Delivery contracts (price agreements without specific
limitations on quantity and providing for an indeterminate number of orders to be placed against it);
these requirements shall apply the first day of the second month after the Offeror reports combined
sales (from state and, if applicable, from local public bodies if from a state price agreement) of
$250,000, $500,000 or $1,000,000.



Signature of Offeror: _________________________           Date________




                                                    27a
                       Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1


APPENDIX F - Letter of Transmittal form

RFP#:_____________________________

Offeror Name: ___________________________________

Items #1 to #7 EACH MUST BE COMPLETED IN FULL Failure to respond to all seven items WILL RESULT IN
THE DISQUALIFICATION OF THE PROPOSAL!

1. Identity (Name) and Mailing Address of the submitting organization:

____________________________________________________________________________

____________________________________________________________________________

____________________________________________________________________________

2: For the person authorized by the organization to contractually obligate the organization:

Name _______________________________________________________________________

Title ________________________________________________________________________

E-Mail Address _______________________________________________________________

Telephone Number _________________________________________________________

3. For the person authorized to negotiate the contract on behalf of the organization:

Name _______________________________________________________________________

Title ________________________________________________________________________

E-Mail Address _______________________________________________________________

Telephone Number ____________________________________________________________

4. For the person to be contacted for clarifications:

Name _______________________________________________________________________

Title ________________________________________________________________________

E-Mail Address _______________________________________________________________

Telephone Number ____________________________________________________________

5. Use of Sub-Contractors (Select one)


                                                   28a
                      Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

____ No sub-contractors will be used in the performance of this contract OR

____ The following sub-contractors will be used in the performance of this contract:

_________________________________________________________________________________

(Attach extra sheets, as needed)

6. Please describe any relationship with any entity with which will be used in the performance of this
contract.

______________________________________________________________________________

(Attach extra sheets, as needed)

7. ___ On behalf of the submitting organization named in item #1, above, I accept the Conditions

        Governing the Procurement as required in Section II, Paragraph C.1.

___     I concur that submission of our proposal constitutes acceptance of the Evaluation Factors
        contained in Section V of this RFP.

___     I acknowledge receipt of any and all amendments to this RFP.



________________________________________________                _____________________, 2012

      Authorized Signature and Date (Must be signed by the person identified in item #2, above.)




                                                  29a
                      Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1


APPENDIX G – Reference Questionnaire


                              REFERENCE QUESTIONNAIRE
The State of New Mexico, as a part of the RFP process, requires proposing vendors to submit a minimum
of three (3) business references as required within this document. The purpose of these references is to
document the experience relevant to the scope of work and provide assistance in the evaluation
process.

The proposing vendor is required to send the following reference form to each business reference listed.
The business reference, in turn, is requested to submit the Reference Form directly to the <Insert where
you want references to come>by the RFP submission deadline for inclusion in the evaluation process.
The form and information provided will become a part of the submitted proposal. The business
reference may be contacted for validation of <Insert the information you plan to obtain from
references>

                       RFP # <Insert #>REFERENCE QUESTIONNAIRE

                                                 FOR:


                                 (Name of company requesting reference)

This form is being submitted to your company for completion as a business reference for the company
listed above. This form is to be returned to the State of New Mexico, <Insert your State agency Name>
via facsimile or e-mail at:

        Name:           <Insert your PM Name>, Procurement Manager
        Address:        <Insert your address>
        Telephone:      <Insert your PM phone>
        Fax:            <Insert your fax>
        Email:          <Insert PM email>

no later than<Insert date>, and must not be returned to the company requesting the reference.


For questions or concerns regarding this form, please contact the State of New Mexico Procurement
Manager listed above. When contacting us, please be sure to include the Request for Proposal number
listed at the top of this page.




                                                  30a
                       Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

                           CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION WHEN COMPLETED



Company providing reference:

Contact name and title/position

Contact telephone number

Contact e-mail address



QUESTIONS:

1.     In what capacity have you worked with this vendor in the past?
       COMMENTS:



2.     How would you rate this firm's knowledge and expertise?

             (3 = Excellent; 2 = Satisfactory; 1 = Unsatisfactory; 0 = Unacceptable)

       COMMENTS:



3.     How would you rate the vendor's flexibility relative to changes in the project scope and
       timelines?
            (3 = Excellent; 2 = Satisfactory; 1 = Unsatisfactory; 0 = Unacceptable)

       COMMENTS:



4.     What is your level of satisfaction with hard-copy materials produced by the vendor?
           (3 = Excellent; 2 = Satisfactory; 1 = Unsatisfactory; 0 = Unacceptable)

       COMMENTS:



5.     How would you rate the dynamics/interaction between the vendor and your staff?
           (3 = Excellent; 2 = Satisfactory; 1 = Unsatisfactory; 0 = Unacceptable)

       COMMENTS:




                                                   31a
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

6.    Who were the vendor’s principal representatives involved in your project and how would you
      rate them individually? Would you comment on the skills, knowledge, behaviors or other
      factors on which you based the rating?
       (3 = Excellent; 2 = Satisfactory; 1 = Unsatisfactory; 0 = Unacceptable)




      Name:                                                             Rating:

      Name:                                                             Rating:

      Name:                                                             Rating:

      Name:                                                                       Rating:

      COMMENTS:

7.    How satisfied are you with the products developed by the vendor?
              (3 = Excellent; 2 = Satisfactory; 1 = Unsatisfactory; 0 = Unacceptable)

      COMMENTS:



8.    With which aspect(s) of this vendor's services are you most satisfied?
      COMMENTS:



9.    With which aspect(s) of this vendor's services are you least satisfied?
      COMMENTS:



10.   Would you recommend this vendor's services to your organization again?
      COMMENTS:




                                                 32a
                        Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

APPENDIX H – Resident Veterans Certification


__________________________________ (NAME OF CONTRACTOR) hereby certifies the following in regard to
application of the resident veterans’ preference to this procurement:

Please check one box only

□ I declare under penalty of perjury that my business prior year revenue starting January 1ending December 31 is
less than $1M allowing me the 10% preference discount on this solicitation. I understand that knowingly giving
false or misleading information about this fact constitutes a crime.

□ I declare under penalty of perjury that my business prior year revenue starting January 1 ending December 31 is
more than $1M but less than $5M allowing me the 8% preference discount on this bid or proposal. I understand
that knowingly giving false or misleading information about this fact constitutes a crime.

□ I declare under penalty of perjury that my business prior year revenue starting January 1ending December 31 is
more than $5M allowing me the 7% preference discount on this bid or proposal. I understand that knowingly
giving false or misleading information about this fact constitutes a crime.

“I agree to submit a report, or reports, to the State Purchasing Division of the General Services
Department declaring under penalty of perjury that during the last calendar year starting January 1 and
ending on December 31, the following to be true and accurate:

 “In conjunction with this procurement and the requirements of this business’ application for a Resident
Veteran Business Preference/Resident Veteran Contractor Preference under NMSA 1978 §13-1-21 or
§13-1-22, when awarded a contract which was on the basis of having such veterans preference, I agree
to report to the State Purchasing Division of the General Services Department the awarded amount
involved. I will indicate in the report the award amount as a purchase from a public body or as a public
works contract from a public body as the case may be.

“I understand that knowingly giving false or misleading information on this report constitutes a crime.”

I declare under penalty of perjury that this statement is true to the best of my knowledge. I understand
that giving false or misleading statements about material fact regarding this matter constitutes a crime.



________________________________            _________________________________

(Signature of Business Representative)*     (Date)

*Must be an authorized signatory for the Business. The representations made in checking the boxes constitute a
material representation by the business that is subject to protest and may result in denial of an award or non-
award of the procurement involved if the statements are proven to be incorrect.




                                                       33a
                      Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1




APPENDIX I – Conflict of Interest Affidavit
                                               AFFIDAVIT

STATE OF NEW MEXICO )
                    ) ss.
COUNTY OF SANTA FE )


I, ________________________________ (name), being first duly sworn upon my oath, depose and state
the following:

   1. I am a former employee of the _________________________ (name of Department/State
      agency), having separated/retired from state employment as of _________________ (date).

   2. I am a current employee of the _________________________ (name of Department/State
      agency), or a legislator with the state, or the family member (spouse, parent, child, sibling by
      consanguinity or affinity) of a current employee or legislator with the state. Being a current
      employee or legislator or family member of a current employee or legislator of the state, I
      hereby certify that I obtained this Agreement pursuant to NMSA 1978, §10-16-7 or §10-16-9,
      that is, in accordance with the Procurement Code except that this Agreement has NOT been
      awarded via the sole source or small purchase procurement methods.

   3. The Department/State agency and I have entered into a agreement in the amount of
      $_____________.

   4. NMSA 1978, §10-16-8.A(1) of the Governmental Conduct Act does not apply to this Agreement
      because I neither sought a contract with the Department/State agency, nor engaged in any
      official act which directly resulted in the formation of the Professional Services Agreement while
      an employee of the Department/State agency.

   5. To the best of my knowledge, this Agreement was awarded in compliance with all relevant
      provisions of the New Mexico Procurement Code (NMSA 1978, §13-1-28, et. seq.).

       FURTHER, AFFIANT SAYETH NOT.


        _______________________________
        name

       Subscribed and sworn to before me by ____________________________ (name of former
       employee) this _____day of _______, 2005.

My Commission Expires:                                           ________________________________

                                                   34a
                  Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

                                                      NOTARY PUBLIC
__________________________________


                     Exhibit B: Sample RFP Amendment Form Template

RFP #_____________________________

RFP Title___________________________________________________________

Date of Amendment__________________________________________________

Section to be amended________________________________________________

Original Text ________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________

___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________

Amended Text ______________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
                     Exhibit B: Sample RFP Amendment Form Template

                                         35a
Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1


   Exhibit C: Sample Application for Resident Certification




                        36a
Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1

                       Exhibit C




Exhibit C: Sample Application for Resident Certification


                          37a
Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 1




Exhibit C: Sample Application for Resident Certification




                          38a
