               Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2




       Best Value Procurement Guide

                 Part 2 – The RFP Process




Issued by:

General Services Department
State Purchasing Division
State of New Mexico



January 2016



                                 i
                                Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2




TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.        Introduction ......................................................................................................................... Page iii

II.       Quick Reference Glossary ............................................................................................... Page 1

III.      The RFP Process ................................................................................................................. Page 4

IV.       Managing the Procurement Process............................................................................ Page 6

V.        Selecting the Evaluation Committee .......................................................................... Page 11

VI.       Evaluating Proposals ......................................................................................................... Page 13

VII.      Debriefing after Award ..................................................................................................... Page 15


EXHIBITS
Exhibit A: Sample Code of Conduct and Confidentiality Agreement ............................ Page 1a

Exhibit B: Sample Evaluation Committee Training Presentation ................................. Page 3a

Exhibit C: Sample Proposal Control Sheet .............................................................................. Page 6a

Exhibit D: Sample Scoring Matrix .............................................................................................. Page 7a




                                                                             ii
                      Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2



I. INTRODUCTION


 This Guide to competitive requests for proposals has been prepared by the State Purchasing Division

 (SPD) of the General Services Department (GSD) of the State of New Mexico (State) and is intended solely

 as reference material for state agencies and local public bodies within New Mexico. This Guide does not

 supersede local, state, or federal laws.



 Best value procurement is the preferred method for considering evaluation factors in addition to

 cost/price for use by any State agency for selecting a firm or contractor to provide services, goods, or

 tangible personal property. The Guide has been organized into two primary areas, the first to describe the

 overall procurement process and the second, to provide examples of required documents to be used to

 ensure attention is given to all the required steps and processes. These document samples can be tailored

 to specific procurements without requiring new document creation.



 The Quick Reference Glossary of terms, Section II, provides formal procurement term definitions that are

 reflected throughout the Guide in italics. These definitions reflect statute or other legal resources use and

 pertain only to this Guide. The statutory language should be used to interpret any ambiguity.

 Please direct any questions, comments about this Guide, or requests for assistance with any aspect of the

 Best Value Procurement process to SPD at (505) 827-0472.




                                                    iii
                      Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2

II. QUICK REFERENCE GLOSSARY
   Best Value Procurement: Procurement method implemented by issuing Request for Proposals (RFP)
    where evaluation factors in addition to cost/price are considered in the selection of a firm or contractor
    and encompasses the total benefits a State entity expects from the acquisition.

   Code of Conduct: Governmental Conduct Act. NMSA 1978, §10-16-1, et seq.

   Competitive Qualifications-Based Selection (QBS): Procurement method using an RFP but, because price is
    not an evaluation factor for selection of a firm or contractor, does not qualify as Best Value Procurement.

   Confidentiality Agreement: Written covenant governing how procurement activities should be carried out
    by the evaluation committee. See also, Non-Disclosure Agreement.

   Confidential information: “Any information which is available to an employee because of the employee’s
    status as an employee within a state agency or a local public body which is not a matter of public
    knowledge or available to the public on request.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-39

   Conflict of Interest: A situation in which a person has a duty to more than one person or organization,
    but cannot do justice to the actually or potentially adverse interests of both parties. Black’s Law
    Dictionary 363 (10th Ed.) 2014

   Construction: “Building, altering, repairing, installing or demolishing in the ordinary course of business
    any:
            (1) road, highway, bridge, parking area or related project;
            (2) building, stadium or other structure;
            (3) airport, subway or similar facility;
            (4) park, trail, athletic field, golf course or similar facility;
            (5) dam, reservoir, canal, ditch or similar facility;
            (6) sewage or water treatment facility power generating plant,
                  pump station, natural gas compressing station or similar facility;
            (7) sewage, water, gas or other pipeline;
            (8) transmission line;
            (9) radio, television or other tower;
            (10) water, oil or other storage tank;
            (11) shaft, tunnel or other mining appurtenance;
            (12) electrical wiring, plumbing or plumbing fixture, gas piping, gas
                  appliances or water conditioners;
            (13) air conditioning conduit, heating or other similar mechanical
                  work; or
            (14) similar work, structures or installations.

     Shall also include:
              (1) leveling or clearing land;
              (2) excavating earth;
              (3) drilling wells of any type, including seismographic shot holes or core drilling; and
              (4) similar work, structures or installations.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-40

   Contract: “Any agreement for the procurement of tangible personal property, services or construction.”
    NMSA 1978, §13-1-41

   Contractor: “Any business having a contract with a state agency or local public body.”
    NMSA 1978, §13-1-43

                                                     1
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2



   Design/Build: Type of project in which the contract includes design and construction services.
    NMSA 1978, §13-1-119.1

   Goods: Tangible and consumable personal property having a physical existence, i.e., durable, commercial
    off-the-shelf products such as vehicles, computers, and equipment; products of economic output.

   Invitation for Bids: All documents, including those attached or incorporated by reference, used for
    soliciting sealed bids.

   Local Public Body: “Every political subdivision of the state that expends public money from whatever
    source derived, including but not limited to counties, county institutions, bureaus or commissions;
    incorporated cities, towns or villages, drainage, conservancy, irrigation or other districts; charitable
    institutions for which an appropriation is made by the legislature; and every office or officer of any of
    the above.” NMSA 1978, §6-6-1

   Low-Bid Procurement: Procurement process for selecting a firm or contractor based exclusively on price
    obtained by verbal or written quotes or issuing an official Invitation for Bids. Also referred to as Low or
    Lowest-Priced Procurement.

   Non-Disclosure Agreement: see Confidentiality Agreement.

   Nonresponsive: Proposal or bid that does not conform to requirements set forth in the Request for
    Proposals or Invitation for Bids and is not evaluated by the evaluation committee.

   Procurement:
           “A. purchasing, renting, leasing, lease purchasing or otherwise acquiring items of tangible
                 personal property, services or construction; and
            B. all procurement functions, including but not limited to preparation of specifications,
                 solicitation of sources, qualification or disqualification of sources, preparation and award
                 of contract and contract administration.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-74

   Procurement Manager: Individual responsible for purchasing or otherwise acquiring items of tangible
    personal property, services, or construction or for managing and coordinating procurement agents,
    buyers, or purchasing agents; the primary point of contact for a firm or contractor.

   Professional Services: “Services of architects, archeologists, engineers, surveyors, landscape architects,
    medical arts practitioners, scientists, management and systems analysts, certified public accountants,
    registered public accountants, lawyers, psychologists, planners, researchers, construction managers and
    other persons or businesses providing similar professional services, which may be designated as such by
    a determination issued by the state purchasing agent or a central purchasing office.”
    NMSA 1978, §13-1-76

   Qualifications-Based Selection (QBS): Procurement process for selecting architects, engineers, landscape
    architects, surveyors, and construction management professionals on the basis of qualifications and
    subsequent negotiations as to price rather than price being an evaluation factor.

   Request for Proposals (RFP): “All documents, including those attached to or incorporated by reference,
    used for soliciting proposals.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-81. “Material respects of a request for a proposal
    include, but are not limited to, price, quality, quantity or delivery requirements.”
    NMSA 1978, §13-1-85

                                                    2
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2

   Resident Preference: “Business with a valid resident business or contractor certificate issued by the NM
    Taxation & Revenue Department.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-22(A)

   Responsible Bidder: “Bidder who submits a responsive bid and has furnished, when required, information
    and data to prove that his financial resources, production or service facilities, personnel, service
    reputation and experience are adequate to make satisfactory delivery of the services, construction or
    items of tangible personal property described in the Invitation for Bids.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-82

   Responsible Offeror: “Offeror who submits a responsive proposal and has furnished, when required,
    information and data to prove that his financial resources, production or service facilities, personnel,
    service reputation and experience are adequate to make satisfactory delivery of the services or items of
    tangible personal property described in the proposal.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-83

   Responsive Bid: “Bid which conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the
    Invitation for Bids. Material aspects of a bid include, but are not limited to, price, quality, quantity or
    delivery requirements.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-84

   Responsive Offer: “Offer which conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the
    Request for Proposals. Material respects of a proposal include, but are not limited to, price quality,
    quantity or delivery requirements.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-85

   Scope of Work: Specific details of work to be performed in completion of a project under a contract.

   Services: “Furnishing labor, time or effort by a contractor not involving the delivery of a specific end
    product other than reports and other materials which are merely incidental to the required
    performance; includes the furnishing insurance but does not include construction or the services of
    employees of a state agency or a local public body.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-87

   State Agency: “Any department, commission, council, board, committee, institution, legislative body,
    agency, government corporation, educational institution or official of the executive, legislative or judicial
    branch of the government of this state; includes the purchasing division of the general services
    department and the state purchasing agent but does not include local public bodies.”
    NMSA 1978, §13-1-90

   Subcontractor: “Individual who takes a portion of a contract from the principal contractor or another
    subcontractor.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1651 (10th Ed.) 2014

   Tangible Personal Property: “Tangible property other than real property having a physical existence,
    including but not limited to supplies, equipment, materials and printed materials.” NMSA 1978, §13-1-93

   Vendor: Entity providing a service or tangible personal property to a state agency.

   Veterans Preference: Business with a valid resident veteran business certificate issued by the NM
    Taxation & Revenue Department. See NMSA 1978, §13-1-22(A). See also, State Purchasing Division
    (SPD) Policy Memo FY13-001: Application of Veterans Preference, attached as Exhibit H to Policy Memo.




                                                     3
                    Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2

III. THE RFP PROCESS

The RFP Process consists of the period from when the RFP is issued to the due date for
proposals. This phase of Best Value Procurement is handled exclusively by the procurement
manager and does not require work by the evaluation committee.

   A. Issuing Public Notice: New Mexico State Statute requires that public notice be
      provided when an RFP is issued. The minimum requirement is a legal notice published
      once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the state agency is
      located. The legal notice must be published at least ten (10) days before proposals are
      due. SPD handles the publication of legal notices pertaining to procurements it
      oversees.

      For construction and complex IT projects, a state agency or SPD should issue public
      notice at least thirty (30) days before proposals are due. This longer notice period is
      recommended because it allows time to hold a pre-proposal conference and enables
      more offerors to submit proposals, thereby increasing the choices available to the state
      agency. Notice in newspapers with statewide circulation is also recommended, so that
      a wider range of firms and vendors can have an opportunity to submit a proposal.

      For projects and services that do not require a pre-proposal conference, such as routine
      services, simpler IT projects, and professional services that are not QBS procurements, a
      fourteen (14) day notice period may be adequate. In addition to a legal notice, state
      agencies should consider notifying their vendors on file, posting their RFP
      announcements on their respective websites as well as any relevant professional
      periodicals, websites, and trade journals that might help disseminate information
      about the RFP.
                                                   Figure 4: Sample Legal Notice of a Request for Proposals


      A sample legal notice is provided in
      Figure 4. The legal notice should
      clearly state that it is announcing an
      RFP, a description of the project
      (title), some basic information
      potential offerors should know about
      the project, and instructions on how
      to obtain a full copy of the RFP along
      with the deadline for proposal
      submissions. If attendance at a pre-
      proposal conference is required, this
      should also be mentioned in the legal
      notice.



                                               4
                 Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2

   Preparing proposals in response to an RFP can be a very resource-intensive process for
   offerors and represents a significant opportunity cost for them. A potential offeror will
   want to know if qualifying offerors will have to go through an interview as part of the
   procurement selection process. If an interview will be required, the legal notice as well
   as the RFP should so indicate. The legal notice and RFP should contain enough
   information to encourage competitive proposals as well as to enable potential offerors
   to determine if they have the capability and time to complete the entire selection
   process and successfully execute the contract.

B. Holding a Pre-Proposal Conference: Construction projects and complex professional
   services projects may include a pre-proposal conference, which gives offerors a chance
   to ask questions about the RFP and project in a public setting, so that all potential
   offers receive the same information. Schedule the conference no later than one (1)
   week after the release of the RFP so that offerors can incorporate into their proposals
   the information obtained from the conference.

   Include in the RFP the time and date of the pre-proposal conference if it is to be held. If
   held, attendance must should be mandatory; therefore, vendors that do not attend
   cannot submit proposals. Maintain a sign-in sheet to track offerors in attendance. The
   procurement manager should answer all questions; evaluation committee members
   need not attend.

C. Issuing Amendments: The state agency may issue amendments to the RFP.
   Substantive amendments or those that could alter the response to the RFP must be
   issued no later than 7 calendar days before the proposal due date. Amendments that
   only extend the proposal due date may be issued any time prior to the deadline,
   although one (1) week notice is recommended.

   As shown in Exhibit B, the state agency must develop a standard RFP Amendment Form
   that contains the RFP number, RFP title, date of the amendment, and the section and
   wording of the RFP that is being amended.

D. Opening Proposals: Stamp the date and time of receipt on all unopened proposal
   envelopes as they are received by the state agency. This evidences receipt in a timely
   manner prior to the closing date and time required in the RFP. Return to offerors all
   proposals received after the required date and time with a cover letter of
   determination of nonresponsive, because of receipt after the date and time required in
   the RFP.

   Open timely proposals as soon as possible after the closing time in the presence of a
   witness and record on a control sheet the RFP number and name, the time of proposal
   opening, the person and witness opening the proposals, and the name of all offerors.
   Those nonresponsive submissions returned to the offerors must also be recorded on
   the control sheet. Place the completed Proposal Control Sheet in the procurement files.
   See Exhibit F for a sample Proposal Control Sheet.

                                            5
                                Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2

       E. Determining Proposal Responsiveness: Screen all proposals to ensure they are
          responsive to the RFP. This means ensuring that proposals include all material
          requirements stated in the RFP, such as quality, quantity, and delivery requirements as
          well as a separate submittal for price. List material requirements on the Proposal
          Control Sheet and check off each as they are confirmed. The witness should conduct a
          second review to verify the accuracy of the first review.

              The procurement manager may deem a proposal nonresponsive if it does not address
              one or more of the material requirements in the RFP; the state agency is not obligated
              to evaluate nonresponsive proposals. Nonresponsive proposals differ from proposals
              with minor errors or omissions, such as typos or a missing signature. Proposals with
              errors that do not alter the substance of the proposal can be accepted, and the
              procurement manager and procurement officer may allow the offeror to correct the
              problem prior to review by the evaluation committee as outlined in the Procurement
              Code.1



IV. MANAGING THE PROCUREMENT PROCESS

         Best Practices: Managing the Procurement Process
         1.    The Procurement Code permits revisions of proposals after submission and prior to award for the purpose
               of obtaining best and final offers (NMSA 1978, §13-1-115), but the practice of negotiating through best
               and final offers is strongly discouraged to avoid a situation in which a reverse auction takes place.
         2.    The Procurement Code permits the procurement manager to waive technical irregularities that do not
               alter the price, quality, or quantity of the services, construction, or items of tangible personal property bid
               or offered as long as the irregularities are insignificant mistakes that can be waived or corrected without
               prejudice to other offerors (NMSA 1978, §13-1-132, and Rule 1.4.1.42, NMAC). Avoid when practical
               allowing revisions to submitted proposals, which can lead to the appearance of impropriety.
         3.    Consider all proposals received after the deadline, regardless of how late, as nonresponsive unless the
               tardiness was the fault of state personnel directly serving the procurement activity (Rule 1.4.1.21(B),
               NMAC).
         4.    Procurement managers should ensure that all stages of the procurement process are well documented.
         5.    Instruct offerors to submit technical proposals and price proposals in separate, sealed packages.
         6.    The procurement manager must withhold Price Proposals from the evaluation committee until after the
               Technical Proposal evaluations have concluded. Under no circumstance shall Price Proposals be handled
               by the evaluation committee prior to the finalization of the Technical Proposal evaluations.


       A. Responsibilities of the Procurement Manager: A state agency representative or staff
          member manages the procurement process and assists the evaluation committee with
          its duties. This individual may be assigned to manage all state agency procurements as
          full-time responsibilities or may be assigned to handle a specific procurement because
          of project familiarity. The staff person may have many titles but will be called the
          procurement manager in this document.


1
    Irregularities in bids or proposals, NMSA 1978, § 13-1-132

                                                                 6
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2

      The procurement manager must be familiar with the procurement policies of the
      involved state agency and is not a voting member of the evaluation committee.
      Responsibilities include:

         Developing the final draft of the RFP and ensuring review by the appropriate
          authorities in order to execute it according to law;
         Working with the procurement manager to issue the legal notice to release the RFP;
         Scheduling meetings for the evaluation committee;
         Leading the pre-proposal conference, if scheduled;
         Receiving and responding to questions from potential offerors regarding the RFP;
         Receiving and date/time-stamping envelopes of proposals received for
          procurements not handled by the SPD;
         Screening proposals for responsiveness and documenting results in a Proposal
          Control Sheet;
         Training the evaluation committee (See Training of the Evaluation Committee
          section)
         Distributing proposals and evaluation forms to committee members;
         Contacting potential offerors for clarifications or negotiations, if needed;
         Drafting the evaluation committee report in concert with members of the
          evaluation committee and submitting it to the procurement officer for approval; and
         Overseeing contract negotiations in conjunction with the project manager.

B. Training Evaluation Committee Members: The procurement manager will develop a
training session to be done in person for the evaluation committee, schedule the training,
communicate the training date simultaneously to all evaluation committee members, and
distribute written materials, including the handouts and a template of the Evaluation
Committee Training Presentation, Exhibit E.

The purpose of evaluation committee training is to ensure that proposals are evaluated
consistently with two important outcomes:

         selecting a responsible offeror that will provide the best value to the state agency,
         ensuring an environment of open and fair competition for the responsible offerors.

Evaluation committee training should cover, at a minimum, the following areas:

          1. Overview of the Procurement Process and Responsibilities of the Evaluation
             Committee: Inform the evaluation committee that they will be using Best Value
             Procurement,because the contractor for the project should be chosen on price as
             well as non-price criteria. Note: the standardized procurement process is not
             designed to completely eliminate subjectivity in the selection method but to
             insert value judgments based on objectively determined criteria into the
             procurement process.



                                               7
          Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2

   Explain thoroughly to the evaluation committee all the primary steps in the
   procurement process. The evaluation committee’s responsibilities include:

   a) Evaluating proposals;
   b) Selecting a short list of responsible offerors to interview, if necessary;
   c) Conducting interviews with responsible offerors, if necessary; and
   d) Recommending a responsible offeror with which the state agency should
      enter into contracts.

   The procurement manager, project manager, and procurement officer have
   responsibility for legal review of pertinent documents, negotiating, and entering
   into contracts.

2. Overview of the Project: The procurement manager should provide the
   evaluation committee with a draft scope of work for the project. The draft scope
   of work should contain the background/need, description, technical/
   professional specifications, and budget for the project. The scope of work will
   become part of the contract.

      For Construction Projects: Design documents such as preliminary
       engineering plans or architectural drawings are typically developed before a
       construction RFP is issued. These documents should become part of the
       scope of work in the RFP.

      For Complex Professional Services, IT, and Technical Projects: Technical
       reports and studies are often developed before issuing RFPs for complex
       services, IT, and technical work. Information from these reports and studies
       should become part of the scope of work in the RFP.

3. Code of Conduct and Confidentiality Agreement: All members of the evaluation
   committee must read and sign a Code of Conduct and Confidentiality Agreement
   containing the guidelines and requirements for professional conduct, conflicts of

4. interest, and non-disclosure of information. Code of Conduct and Confidentiality
   Agreement, Exhibit B, and its sections are defined as follows:

      Professional Conduct: Behavior that will ensure a fair and consistent
       evaluation of proposals in a manner that is defensible and in accordance
       with the parameters set forth in the RFP.

      Conflicts of Interest:   Undue influence on the selection process due to
       personal interests.

      Non-Disclosure Agreement: Covenant outlining the manner in which
       information is handled during and after the selection process. Committee

                                    8
          Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2

       members shall not discuss information pertaining to the RFP selection
       process with non-committee members, even after a selection has been
       made. Proposals can contain sensitive or proprietary information that
       responsible offerors do not want shared with competitors or the public.

5. Evaluation Criteria: Best Value Procurement uses well-defined criteria to
   evaluate proposals. Points are assigned to each criterion to help the evaluation
   committee rank the proposals and ultimately determine which responsible
   offeror to recommend for a project. For these reasons, it is critical to train the
   evaluation committee on core elements of the criteria and how to apply them.

6. Technical vs. Price Proposals: According to legal requirements, responsible
   offerors must submit a Technical Proposal and a Price Proposal, each in
   separate sealed packages, for the evaluation committee to review. Price
   Proposals are not reviewed until the Technical Proposal containing all the non-
   price factors is fully evaluated. This process ensures that non-price factors are
   evaluated in their own right, without being influenced by a responsible offeror’s
   price. To ensure the proper evaluation sequence, the procurement manager
   must withhold Price Proposals from the evaluation committee until after the
   Technical Proposal evaluations are concluded. Under no circumstance shall
   Price Proposals be handled by the evaluation committee prior to the finalization
   of the Technical Proposal evaluations.

7. Evaluating Against the Criteria: Ensure the evaluation committee understands
   that they are not comparing proposals; scoring is not done on a relative scale.
   Instead, they are evaluating each proposal individually, against the evaluation
   criteria. This is important to achieve fair and impartial scoring of each proposal.

8. Independent Review, Discussion, Consensus: Explain the process to review
   proposals to the evaluation committee:

      Independent Review: Evaluation committee members should read and
       review independently upon receipt each proposal based on stated
       evaluation criteria. The individual scores of committee members are
       preliminary assessments and may be modified during the consensus period
       of the evaluation deliberations.

      Evaluation Committee Discussion: The entire committee will meet and
       discuss the proposals. Group discussion allows committee members to
       receive input from one another as well as from technical experts on the
       committee. Each committee member will assign and record scores for the
       proposals, and the procurement manager will total the scores.

      Consensus: When scoring, the committee should attempt to reach consensus
       on the tier or range (see Scoring Guidance, below), although the numerical

                                    9
                               Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2

                          scores they individually assign to each criterion would likely be different.
                          The ultimate scoring of proposals should be based on a mutually agreed
                          upon score, rather than, on a median.

                9. Standard Evaluation Criteria and Points: Instruct the evaluation committee of
                   the criteria that are standard requirements of an RFP. While non-price criteria
                   are flexible and can be tailored to specific projects, most procurements use the
                   following standard criteria:

                     a) past performance
                     b) experience relevant to the project
                     c) project staffing or project team
                     d) management plan or approach to the project
                     e) health and safety record (for Construction and Facility Maintenance
                        projects)
                     f) price.

                     Variations can be used depending on the type of project. Other criteria and
                     corresponding points can be added to meet the needs of the project.

                     The New Mexico Administrative Code permits Best Value Procurement to assign
                     a weight of 30-70% to pricing. This percentage weight will vary with the
                     complexity, specificity, and urgency of each individual project.

                     The evaluation process is simplified by having the points for all criteria total
                     100, 1000, or another multiple of 10.

                10. Scoring Guidance: Without guidance, each committee member might interpret
                   each criterion and score each response subjectively. This could result in a wide
                   range of scores with no clear consensus. The procurement manager must
                   prepare a Scoring Matrix for the evaluation committee similar to the sample
                   provided in Exhibit F. Include in the Matrix each criterion, points assigned to
                   each criterion, and tiers or ranges to help the committee evaluate the proposals
                   consistently and to facilitate consensus.

               11. Preferences: Inform the evaluation committee when preferences must be used
                   in the procurement process. State agencies must assign up to 5% additional
                   points for local businesses located in New Mexico.2 To be eligible for the
                   additional points, responsible offerors shall be required to submit with their
                   proposal a copy of their Resident Business Certificate or Resident Veteran
                   Contractor Certificate to substantiate their status as a local enterprise. All
                   preference certificates, including Resident Business Certificates and Resident
                   Veteran Contractor Certificates, are issued by the New Mexico Taxation &


2
    Application of preferences requirements, descriptions and applications, NMSA 1978, §§13-1-21, 22 and 14-2.

                                                                10
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2

             Revenue Department upon approval of an application. See Exhibit G, Application
             for Resident Business Certification.

             Preferences are mandatory when state and/or local funds are exclusively
             involved in the purchase. Federal funds typically prohibit the use of a local,
             state, or veterans preference.

        12. Interviews: As stated earlier, the legal notice and the RFP should clearly state if
            interviews will be conducted as part of the selection process and the impact on
            the overall scoring procedures. If the evaluation committee will be selecting the
            top responsible offerors based on proposals and then conducting interviews with
            this short list of responsible offerors, the RFP should clearly state if the interview
            will be part of an aggregate score that will include the written proposal or if the
            interview will be the sole set of criteria on which the evaluation committee will
            select a contractor, which is known as a two-step process.

             In deciding what information to obtain through interviews, the evaluation
             committee must objectively consider its ability to evaluate adequately
             information. In addition, the evaluation committee should consider the costs
             associated with conducting interviews, both to the evaluation committee and
             the responsible offerors (e.g. time, travel, and opportunity costs). Consider
             alternatives to on-site interviews when feasible, such as teleconferencing, video
             conferencing, etc.).

             Finally, the evaluation committee must develop a way to standardize the
             interview assessment. All responsible offerors should be asked the same
             questions and follow up questions. Facilitate scoring by making questions as
             specific as possible.



V. SELECTING THE EVALUATION COMMITTEE
Best Practices: Selecting the Evaluation Committee
1. Choose three to five qualified voting members.
2. Select committee members with knowledge or expertise relevant to the project.
3. Identify and select committee members early in the procurement process.
4. Request committee members to sign a Code of Conduct and Confidentiality Agreement affirming
   they have no conflicts of interest and will agree to a non-disclosure clause pledging
   confidentiality during and after the selection process.
5. Provide training to committee members before they begin to evaluate proposals.
6. The state agency should offer to pay committee members not employed by the state agency a
   per diem in accordance with its per diem policies.
7. The Procurement officer or staff member should assist the evaluation committee.



                                               11
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2

Establish the process for selecting members of the evaluation committee prior to RFP release.
If scheduling conflicts cannot be resolved after setting meeting dates convenient for all
members, allot time to seek alternate members. Ideally, the make-up of the evaluation
committee will not change during the procurement process. Once proposals are received, this
group will conduct all activities of the standardized procurement process, including:

      confirming proposal responsiveness;
      evaluating responsive offers;
      identifying a short list of responsible offerors to interview, if necessary;
      conducting interviews with responsive offerors, if necessary; and
      making a recommendation to the state agency on which responsible offeror they
       determine can provide the state agency with the best value and complete a specific
       project according to pre-set criteria.

An evaluation committee typically consists of three to five members with some level of subject
matter expertise or knowledge regarding the project. Achieve diversity on the evaluation
committee by selecting members with different types of expertise and members representing
different areas depending on the size and complexity of the procurement. When necessary, the
procurement manager should ensure that non-voting subject matter experts are on hand to
provide their expertise, analysis, and recommendations to the evaluation committee so that
they are able to make informed decisions. For example, the state agency’s accountant can
confirm that a responsible offeror’s financial statements are in order.

Evaluation committee members might need to attend several meetings and should be aware
of the time commitment required. As a result of their critical responsibilities, evaluation
committee members must be trained on the procurement process, maintain confidentiality
during and after the procurement process, have no conflicts of interest or benefit personally by
the selection outcome. These requirements are described in more detail in the following
sections.

Figure 5 details the composition of an evaluation committee and the role that each member
might have in the procurement process.




                                              12
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2

Figure 5: Sample Composition of Evaluation Committee


 VOTING MEMBER DESCRIPTION OF COMMITTEE MEMBER

 Project Manager      Staff person to manage the process once a contract is finalized. The project manager
                      may provide expertise to assist in the drafting of the scope of work.


 State agency         Staff person (other than the project manager) or contractor with in-depth knowledge
 Representative       of the background and need for the project. This person may draft or assist in
                      drafting the scope of work and provide input on the relationship between this project
                      and others in the state agency.


 Technical Expert     Expert in the project’s specific field to provide technical review. Experts may be staff
                      members, contractors, members of professional organizations, or professionals living
                      in the community.


 Specialty            Additional specialty experts may be warranted for projects with specific technical
 Technical Expert     requirements, such as hospitals, auditoriums, or disaster recovery centers.


 User                 Representative on evaluation committee from a state agency using the project
 Representative       deliverable provided by another state agency. User group representatives are
                      especially important for large, visible community projects.




VI. EVALUATING PROPOSALS
Once a date has been selected for the evaluation committee to meet and review the proposals,
the procurement manager must ensure the members of the evaluation committee will have all
of the necessary resources available to them during the evaluation session. To expedite the
evaluation process, provide each member with a copy of each proposal (the RFP can require
that offerors submit multiple copies of the proposal). As reference material, the procurement
manager should distribute handouts of the training presentation as well as a copy of this
guide.

Prior to the evaluation meeting, appoint one member of the evaluation committee to check
references as opposed to relying upon past performance as provided in the proposals.
Although the New Mexico State statute does not specifically govern the details of how
references are to be evaluated, as a best practice, handle all communication through e-mail in
order to generate a public document and to keep the process consistent. Ask the same
questions of all reference contacts. Sample areas on which to focus these questions include:



                                                   13
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2

      Working Relationship: Did the contractor collaborate and work as a partner with the
       best interest of the client in mind?
      Communication by Contractor:            Were there clear, open, and responsive
       communications with the owner throughout the project?
      Performance History Meeting Milestones and Deadlines: Were important project
       milestones met; was the project completed on time?
      Cost of Control Measures: How well did the contractor work with the project owner to
       control costs from bid through project completion, and was the project completion
       within budget?
      Accuracy of Billing and Documentation: Was invoicing timely, accurate, and correctly
       classified? Were billings supported by adequate documentation? Were errors
       corrected promptly by the contractor?
      Customer Satisfaction and Impression: How satisfied is the owner overall with the
       completed project and the process the contractor followed on the project? What is the
       owner’s lasting impression of the contractor?

Provide a copy of the reference responses to each evaluation committee member. Address the
manner to score the references in the training presentation. One way to generate a score from
the references is to have the evaluation committee rank each area on a scale of 1 to 5, where:

              1 = Poor
              2 = Below Average
              3 = Average
              4 = Good
              5 = Excellent

If preferences are to be used in the procurement, instruct a member of the evaluation
committee to check the validity of every offeror’s preference status prior to the evaluation
session. This can easily be done online by entering the offeror’s name and preference
certificate number in the New Mexico Taxation & Revenue Department’s preferences
validation website: https://secure.mvd.newmexico.gov/residentcertificate/default.aspx.

If the evaluation committee will be selecting a short-list of candidates to interview, remind
members whether the interview is part of an aggregate result that will include their current
evaluation scores or if it is a two-step process, in which the successful contractor will be
selected from the short list of candidates interviewed based on interview responses alone.
Encourage evaluation committee members to take detailed notes during the interview and
specify, in writing, what they relied upon in making the source selection decision.

Identify one committee member to be responsible for summarizing the committee members’
input during the evaluation sessions. This summary, along with the scores, will become part of
the public record as a Committee Report.

Retain all documents pertaining to the procurement process in a file that must be kept for
three years by the state agency. If the procurement was done by SPD, the file is kept by SPD.

                                             14
                             Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2

Prior to award, the state agency shall ensure award documents and contracts have been
reviewed by the state agency’s legal counsel to ensure legal sufficiency of the procurement.

VII. DEBRIEFING POST AWARD
Once the evaluation process has concluded and an award has been made to a successful
offeror, the offerors not selected have ten (10) business days to request in writing a debriefing
session with the procurement manager. In no case shall a debriefing be held prior to the
expiration of the protest period, which is fifteen (15) days after an award has been made.3

Debriefings are an opportunity for unsuccessful offerors to learn more about the procurement
process, how a decision was made, and how they can improve future proposals. Discuss only
the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal submitted by the offeror being debriefed.

Debriefings not only afford offerors an opportunity to receive feedback, they also allow
offerors to submit their input. Be open to receiving constructive feedback on how the
procurement was perceived and how future improvements to the procurement process can be
implemented.




3
    Right to protest, NMSA 1978, §13-1-172.

                                               15
                          Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2


                                                  Exhibit A

                          Sample Code of Conduct and Confidentiality Agreement

I, the undersigned, a member of the Evaluation Committee for Request for Proposal #[Insert RFP #] for
[Insert RFP Title] will perform the evaluation under the guidelines and requirements set forth below:

1. Professional Conduct

    I have a professional interest in ensuring that the scoring and evaluation of the offeror responses to the
    above named Request for Proposal can be supported and defended, and that the recommendation of
    the Evaluation Committee will lead to the selection of the proposal most advantageous to the
    [Insert State agency Name], taking into consideration the evaluation factors set forth in the RFP.

2. Conflict of Interest

    a. I herby affirm that I shall not accept any favor, gratuity, or any other thing of value from any
       person, firm, corporation or other entity that has submitted a proposal for funding or is in the
       process of negotiating a contract with the [Insert State agency Name]. Such favors, gratuities, or
       things of value shall include, but not be limited to, the seeking of or acceptance of gifts, favors,
       services, promises of future employment, and/or honorariums, from [Insert State agency Name]
       suppliers, contractors, regulated enterprises or individuals, interested parties or people seeking
       to do business with [Insert State agency Name].


    b. I also agree that I shall disqualify myself from participating in any aspect of the proposal review
       and/or negotiation process directly or indirectly affecting a business in which I or a member of
       my immediate family has a financial interest.

    c. I may not participate in the development of proposals in response to this solicitation.


3. Non-Disclosure of Information

     a.   I understand that offeror responses to the above named RFP will be provided to me upon the
          receipt of this signed Code of Conduct and Confidentiality agreement. The responses are being
          shared with me as a member of the Evaluation Committee with the understanding they are
          confidential and should be treated as such. They are for the sole use of the members of the
          Evaluation Committee and alternates, as a part of their confidential information. Review of
          material is intended only for the individuals within the evaluation committee and mentioned
          within this Code of Conduct and Confidentiality Agreement.

     b.   I affirm that I shall maintain the strictest level of confidentiality regarding all aspects of the
          proposal review and/or contract negotiation process. I shall not discuss with any person, or
          disclose, at any time, to any person, the contents or scoring of proposals, and/or decisions of
          the evaluation committee throughout the proposal, review, protest, and/or contract
          negotiation process.


                                                     1a
                       Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2
I understand and agree to abide this Code of Conduct and Confidentiality Agreement and all applicable
[Insert State agency Name] policies and laws and further agree to take full responsibility for the copies
of all proposals delivered into my care. I will not disclose, or make available the contents therein to
competing offerors or persons not involved in the evaluation process.

If I should become aware of any situation, which might arise, that could alter any of the representations
above, or that might otherwise create the appearance of a conflict or other impropriety, I will notify the
Purchasing Officer and committee chair immediately.



__________________________________                                __________________

Procurement Manager                                      Date




__________________________________                                __________________

Member, Evaluation Committee (signature)                 Date




__________________________________

Member, Evaluation Committee (print)




                   Exhibit A: Sample Code of Conduct and Confidentiality Agreement




                                                    2a
                                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2
                                   Exhibit B: Sample Evaluation Committee Training Presentation




                                                                       1. Purpose of the Training



                                                                          Ensure proposals are evaluated in a consistently to:
                       RFP #
                                                                          1) Select the offeror that will provide the best value to the
                                                                              state agency
                   RFP Title
                                                                          2) Ensure an environment of open and fair competition
                                                                             for the offerors
        Evaluation Committee Training

    Date
                                                                          NOTE: Oversee introductions of committee members




2. Overview of Procurement Process/                                    3. Code of Conduct and Confidentiality Agreement
   Responsibilities of the Committee
                                                                              Professional Standards
   Best Value Procurement allows committee members to
   consider qualifications and other criteria along with price.               No Conflicts of Interest

   Steps in the process include:                                              Non-Disclosure of Information
                                                                               o All information contained in proposals will be
   1)   Draft and approve Request for Proposals                                   treated confidentially
   2)   Issue RFP and receive proposals (staff only)                           o Cannot be shared with other offerors or persons
   3)   Evaluate proposals                                                        not participating in the evaluation process
   4)   Select short list or single offeror                                    o Terms of confidentiality do not end once the
   5)   Interviews (optional)                                                     evaluation process has concluded
   6)   Negotiate and enter into contract

                                                                          NOTE: Distribute and review Code of Conduct. Ask committee members to
                                                                          sign Code of Conduct before they leave the training.




                                                                  3a
                                           Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2
                                             Exhibit B: Evaluation Committee Training Presentation



4. Overview of Project                                                     5. Evaluation Process



             Background and need for the Project                                Technical vs. Price Proposals

             Description                                                        Scoring against the criteria

             Technical Specifications                                           Independent review, discussion, consensus

             Project budget




   NOTE: Provide committee with draft Scope of Work to review




6. Evaluation Criteria                                                     7. Guidelines on How to Score References

             Past Performance or qualifications                              Definition:
             Experience relevant to the Project
             Project Staffing or Project team                                    1 = Poor
             Management Plan or approach to the Project
             Health and Safety record                                            2 = Below Average
             Price
                                                                                  3 = Average
             Resident Preference or Veterans Preference
                                                                                  4 = Good

                                                                                  5 = Excellent




                                                                      4a
                              Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2


                            Exhibit B: Sample Evaluation Committee Training Presentation




8. Short List                                                9. Interviews




10. Contract Negotiations                                    11. Committee Report




                       Exhibit B: Sample Evaluation Committee Training Presentation




                                                        5a
                     Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2
                             Exhibit C: Sample Proposal Control Sheet

All responsive proposals submitted in response to RFP#12345678 for Sample Services were opened on:

                Date___________________________         At:_____________AM/PM

Offeror    Name of    Contact     Responsive    Opened       Opened by     Witness     Witness
Name       Contact     email        or Non-     by (Print)   (Signature)   (Print)   (Signature)
            Person                responsive
                                 (Date & time
                                   Received)




                                                6a
                       Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2
                                          Exhibit D: Scoring Matrix



                             Note: Tiers and points provided as examples only



Insert RFP Number and Title

                                                                        Offeror    Offeror    Offeror
                                                                           1          2          3
Insert Name of Evaluator



1. Past Performance or Qualifications : 15 points
   [Insert criterion description from RFP]



  Tier 1: 1-15 points
  Certain that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:
    Experience significantly exceeds minimum standards
    Strengths outweigh weaknesses, if any
                                                                       Offeror    Offeror    Offeror
                                                                          1          2          3



  Tier 2: 6-10 points
  Possible that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:
    Experience meets minimum standards
    Strengths offset by weaknesses, if any
                                                                       Offeror    Offeror    Offeror
                                                                          1          2          3




  Tier 3: 1-5 points
  Uncertain that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:
    Questionable if experience meets minimum standards
    Weaknesses outweighed by strengths
                                                                       Offeror    Offeror    Offeror
                                                                          1          2          3




                                                       7a
                           Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2
2. Experience Relevant to the Project: 15 points
    [Insert criterion description from RFP]

    Tier 1: 11-15 points
    Certain that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:
     Two or more projects of similar size and complexity
     Three positive references, if required
                                                                        Offeror   Offeror   Offeror
                                                                           1         2         3


    Tier 2: 6-10 points

    Possible that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:

       One project of similar size and complexity
       Two positive references, if required
                                                                        Offeror   Offeror   Offeror
                                                                           1         2         3




    Tier 3: 1-5 points

    Uncertain that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:

       One project of similar size
       One positive reference, if required
                                                                        Offeror   Offeror   Offeror
                                                                           1         2         3




3. Project Staffing or Project Team: 15 points

    [Insert criterion description from RFP]

    Tier 1: 11-15 points

    Certain that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:

       Experience and qualifications significantly exceeds minimum standards
       Documented experience of past collaboration
       Clear organizational structure
                                                                        Offeror   Offeror   Offeror
                                                                           1         2         3




                                                        8a
                          Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2
   Tier 2: 6-10 points

   Possible that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:

      Experience and qualifications meet minimum standards
      Some past collaboration
      Organizational structure adequate but could be improved
                                                                       Offeror   Offeror      Offeror
                                                                          1         2            3



3. Project Staffing or Project Team, (Continued): 15 points

   Tier 3: 1-5 points

   Uncertain that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:

      Questionable if experience and qualifications meet minimum standards
      Minimal to no evidence of past collaboration
      Organizational structure unclear or confusing
                                                                       Offeror   Offeror      Offeror
                                                                          1         2            3



4. Management Plan: 15 points

   [Insert criterion description from RFP]

   Tier 1: 11-15 points

   Certain that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:

      Detailed understanding of project requirements
      Project management approach exceeds performance and quality requirements for the project
      Project schedule meets or exceeds deadlines, may introduce some efficiencies
                                                                       Offeror   Offeror      Offeror
                                                                          1         2            3




                                                       9a
                          Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2
   Tier 2: 6-10 points

   Possible that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:

      Adequate understanding of project requirements
      Project management approach meets performance or quality requirements for the project.
      Project schedule meets deadlines
                                                                       Offeror   Offeror        Offeror
                                                                          1         2              3



   Tier 3: 1-5 points

   Uncertain that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:

      Limited understanding of project requirements
      Project management approach does not meet all or some performance or quality requirements for the
       project
       Questionable if project schedule meets deadlines
                                                                       Offeror   Offeror        Offeror
                                                                          1         2              3




5. Health and Safety Record (15 points)—if applicable

   [Insert criterion description from RFP]

   Tier 1: 11-15 points

   Certain that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:

      Comprehensive health & safety plan
      History of exceeding health & safety targets
      High safety rating
      Evidence of subcontractor involvement in firm’s health & safety management system
                                                                       Offeror   Offeror        Offeror
                                                                          1         2              3




                                                      10a
                           Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2
    Tier 2: 6-10 points

    Possible that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:

       Comprehensive health & safety plan
       History of achieving health & safety targets
       Average safety rating
       Evidence of subcontractor involvement in firm’s health & safety management system

                                                                        Offeror        Offeror   Offeror
                                                                           1              2         3


    Tier 3: 1-5 points

    Uncertain that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:

       Comprehensive health & safety plan
       Below average safety rating
                                                                        Offeror        Offeror   Offeror
                                                                           1              2         3



6. Price (25 points)

    Tier 1: 11-15 points

    Certain that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:

       Price is responsive to RFP requirements and instructions
       Price is realistic in respect to project plans and specifications
       Methodology provided for all components
       Price includes base price and alternates—if applicable
                                                                        Offeror        Offeror   Offeror
                                                                           1              2         3



    Tier 2: 6-10 points

    Possible that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:

       Price is responsive to RFP requirements and instructions
       Questions about price being realistic in respect to project plans and specifications
       Methodology missing for some components
       Price includes base price and alternates—if applicable
                                                                        Offeror        Offeror   Offeror
                                                                           1              2         3



                                                          11a
                         Best Value Procurement Guide – Part 2

    Tier 3: 1-5 points

    Uncertain that offeror can perform project successfully, based on:

       Price is not responsive to RFP requirements and instructions
       Price is not realistic in respect to project plans and specifications
       Methodology not provided for all components
       Price does not include base price and alternates—if applicable
                                                                        Offeror   Offeror   Offeror
                                                                           1         2         3




   7. Resident preference (5 points)




                                    Exhibit D: Scoring Matrix



                                                         12a
